--- Judgment Metadata ---
Title: Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) And Anr. vs Union Of India And Ors. on 24 August, 2017
Document ID: 91938676
Source URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/91938676/
Court: Supreme Court of India
Bench: Bench:S Abdul Nazeer,Sanjay Kishan Kaul,D Y Chandrachud,Abhay Manohar Sapre,Rohinton Fali Nariman,R K Agrawal,S A Bobde,J Chelameswar,Jagdish Singh Khehar
Date of Judgment: 24 August, 2017
Petitioner(s): Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) And Anr.
Respondent(s): Union Of India And Ors.
Citations: Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 SUPREME COURT 4161, (2017) 6 BOM CR 78, AIR 2017 SC (CIV) 2714, (2017) 3 KER LJ 17, 2017 (10) SCC 1, (2017) 124 ALL LR 877, (2017) 10 SCALE 1, (2017) 4 CURCC 87, (2017) 6 MAD LJ 267, (2017) 5 ALLMR 686 (SC), (2018) 1 RECCIVR 398, 2017 (178) AIC (SOC) 1 (SC), 242 (2017) DLT 9 (CN)(SC), 2017 (3) KCCR SN 255 (SC), 2017 (4) KLT SN 1 (KER)

--- Judgment Content ---

Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Member Services--Sign up todayand get free trial for one month.

Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD, J

This judgment has been divided into sections to facilitate analysis. They are :

M   Constituent Assembly and privacy: limits of originalist interpretation
N   Is the statutory protection to privacy reason to deny a constitutional right?
O   Not an elitist construct
P   Not just a common law right
Q   Substantive Due Process
R   Essential nature of privacy
S   Informational privacy
T   Conclusions3PART A


A      The reference

1      Nine judges of this Court assembled to determine whether privacy is a

constitutionally protected value. The issue reaches out to the foundation of a

constitutional culture based on the protection of human rights and enables this Court

to revisit the basic principles on which our Constitution has been founded and their

consequences for a way of life it seeks to protect. This case presents challenges for

constitutional interpretation. If privacy is to be construed as a protected constitutional

value, it would redefine in significant ways our concepts of liberty and the entitlements

that flow out of its protection.

2      Privacy, in its simplest sense, allows each human being to be left alone in a

core which is inviolable. Yet the autonomy of the individual is conditioned by her

relationships with the rest of society. Those relationships may and do often pose

questions to autonomy and free choice. The overarching presence of state and non-

state entities regulates aspects of social existence which bear upon the freedom of

the individual. The preservation of constitutional liberty is, so to speak, work in

progress. Challenges have to be addressed to existing problems. Equally, new

challenges have to be dealt with in terms of a constitutional understanding of where

liberty places an individual in the context of a social order. The emergence of new

challenges is exemplified by this case, where the debate on privacy is being analysed

in the context of a global information based society. In an age where information

technology governs virtually every aspect of our lives, the task before the Court is to4PART A


impart constitutional meaning to individual liberty in an interconnected world. While

we revisit the question whether our constitution protects privacy as an elemental

principle, the Court has to be sensitive to the needs of and the opportunities and

dangers posed to liberty in a digital world.

3      A Bench of three judges of this Court, while considering the constitutional

challenge to the Aadhaar card scheme of the Union government noted in its order

dated 11 August 2015 that the norms for and compilation of demographic biometric

data by government was questioned on the ground that it violates the right to privacy.

The Attorney General for India urged that the existence of a fundamental right of

privacy is in doubt in view of two decisions : the first – M P Sharma v Satish Chandra,

District Magistrate, Delhi1 (“M P Sharma”) was rendered by a Bench of eight

judges and the second, in Kharak Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh2 (“Kharak

Singh”) was rendered by a Bench of six judges. Each of these decisions, in the

submission of the Attorney General, contained observations that the Indian

Constitution does not specifically protect the right to privacy.On the other hand, the

submission of the petitioners was that M P Sharma and Kharak Singh were founded

on principles expounded inA K Gopalan v State of Madras3 (“Gopalan”).Gopalan,

which construed each provision contained in the Chapter on fundamental rights as

embodying a distinct protection, was held not to be good law by an eleven-judge1(1954) SCR 10772(1964) 1 SCR 3323AIR 1950 SC 275PART A


Bench in Rustom Cavasji Cooper v Union of India4 (“Cooper”). Hence the

petitioners submitted that the basis of the two earlier decisions is not valid. Moreover,

it was also urged that in the seven-judge Bench decision in Maneka Gandhi v Union

of India5 (“Maneka”), the minority judgment of Justice Subba Rao in Kharak Singh

was specifically approved of and the decision of the majority was overruled.



4      While addressing these challenges, the Bench of three judges of this Court took

note of several decisions of this Court in which the right to privacy has been held to

be a constitutionally protected fundamental right.Those decisions include :Gobind

v State of Madhya Pradesh6 (“Gobind”),R Rajagopal v State of Tamil Nadu7

(“Rajagopal”) and People’s Union for Civil Liberties v Union of India8 (“PUCL”).

These subsequent decisions which affirmed the existence of a constitutionally

protected right of privacy, were rendered by Benches of a strength smaller than those

in M P Sharma and Kharak Singh. Faced with this predicament and having due

regard to the far-reaching questions of importance involving interpretation of the

Constitution, it was felt that institutional integrity and judicial discipline would require

a reference to a larger Bench. Hence the Bench of three learned judges observed in

its order dated 11 August 2015:

13. Therefore, in our opinion to give a quietus to the kind of
             controversy raised in this batch of cases once for all, it is better that
             the ratio decidendi ofM.P. Sharma(supra) and Kharak Singh
             (supra) is scrutinized and the jurisprudential correctness of the
             subsequent decisions of this Court where the right to privacy is
             either asserted or referred be examined and authoritatively decided
             by a Bench of appropriate strength.”



5     On 18 July 2017, a Constitution Bench presided over by the learned Chief

Justice considered it appropriate that the issue be resolved by a Bench of nine judges.

The order of the Constitution Bench reads thus:

6     During the course of hearing, we have been ably assisted on behalf of the

petitioners by Mr Gopal Subramanium, Mr Kapil Sibal, Mr Arvind Datar, Mr Shyam

Divan, Mr Anand Grover, Ms Meenakshi Arora, Mr Sajan Poovayya and Mr Jayant

Bhushan, learned senior counsel. Mr J S Attri, learned senior counsel supported them

on behalf of the State of Himachal Pradesh. On behalf of the Union of India, the Court

has had the benefit of the erudite submissions of Mr K K Venugopal, Attorney General

for India. He has been ably supported by Mr Tushar Mehta, Additional Solicitor

General, Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, senior counsel for the State of Gujarat, Mr Aryama

Sundaram for the State of Maharashtra, Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan and Dr Arghya

Sengupta respectively. While some state governments have supported the stand of

the Union government, others have supported the petitioners.




7     The correctness of the decisions in M P Sharma and Kharak Singh, is to be

evaluated during the course of the reference. Besides, the jurisprudential correctness

of subsequent decisions holding the right to privacy to be a constitutionally protected

right is to be determined. The basic question whether privacy is a right protected

under our Constitution requires an understanding of what privacy means. For it is

when we understand what interests or entitlements privacy safeguards, that we can

determine whether the Constitution protects privacy. The contents of privacy need to8PART B


be analysed, not by providing an exhaustive enunciation or catalogue of what it

includes but by indicating its broad contours. The Court has been addressed on

various aspects of privacy including : (i) Whether there is a constitutionally protected

right to privacy; (ii) If there is a constitutionally protected right, whether this has the

character of an independent fundamental right or whether it arises from within the

existing guarantees of protected rights such as life and personal liberty; (iii) the

doctrinal foundations of the claim to privacy; (iv) the content of privacy; and (v) the

nature of the regulatory power of the state.

Act into the affairs of a company which was in liquidation on the ground that it had

made an organized attempt to embezzle its funds and to conceal the true state of its

affairs from the share-holders and on the allegation that the company had indulged in

fraudulent transactions and falsified its records. Offences were registered and search

warrants were issued during the course of which, records were seized. The challenge

was that the searches violated the fundamental rights of the petitioners underArticle

19(1)(f)andArticle 20(3)of the Constitution. The former challenge was rejected. The

question which this Court addressed was whether there was a contravention ofArticle

20(3).Article 20(3)mandates that no person accused of an offence shall be compelled

to be a witness against himself. Reliance was placed on a judgment9 of the US9Boyd v. United States, 116 US 616 (1886)9PART B


Supreme Court holding that obtaining incriminating evidence by an illegal search and

seizure violates the Fourth and Fifth Amendments of the American Constitution. While

tracing the history of Indian legislation, this Court observed that provisions for search

were contained in successive enactments of theCriminal Procedure Code. Justice

Jagannadhadas, speaking for the Bench, held that a search or seizure does not

infringe the constitutional right guaranteed byArticle 20(3)of the Constitution:

Ibid, at page 1096-9711PART C

(c) the verification of movements and absences by means of inquiry
                   slips;

(f) the collection and record on a history-sheet of all information
                   bearing on conduct.”


12         This Court held that the freedom to move freely throughout the territory of India,

guaranteed byArticle 19(1)(d)was not infringed by a midnight knock on the door of

the petitioner since “his locomotion is not impeded or prejudiced in any manner”.



13         When the decision in Kharak Singh was handed down, the principles

governing the inter-relationship between the rights protected byArticle 19and the

right to life and personal liberty underArticle 21were governed by the judgment in

Gopalan. Gopalan considered each of the articles in the Chapter on fundamental

rights as embodying distinct (as opposed to over-lapping) freedoms. Hence in Kharak

Singh, the Court observed :

14         The decision in Kharak Singh held that clause (b) ofRegulation 236which

provided for domiciliary visits at night was violative ofArticle 21.The Court observed:

15      In taking this view, Justice Rajagopala Ayyangar, speaking for a majority of five

judges, relied upon the judgment of Justice Frankfurter, speaking for the US Supreme

Court in Wolf v Colorado14, which held :

16         Kharak Singh regards the sanctity of the home and the protection against

unauthorized intrusion an integral element of “ordered liberty”. This is comprised in

‘personal liberty’ guaranteed byArticle 21.The decision invalidated domiciliary visits

at night authorised byRegulation 236 (b), finding them to be an unauthorized intrusion

into the home of a person and a violation of the fundamental right to personal liberty.

However, while considering the validity of clauses (c),(d) and (e) which provided for

periodical enquiries, reporting by law enforcement personnel and verification of

movements, this Court held as follows :

17         Justice Subba Rao dissented. Justice Subba Rao held that the rights conferred

by Part III have overlapping areas. Where a law is challenged as infringing the right

to freedom of movement underArticle 19(1)(d)and the liberty of the individual underArticle 21, it must satisfy the tests laid down inArticle 19(2)as well as the requirements

ofArticle 21.Justice Subba Rao held that :

18    Justice Subba Rao held thatArticle 21embodies the right of the individual to

be free from restrictions or encroachments. In this view, though the Constitution does

not expressly declare the right to privacy as a fundamental right, such a right is

essential to personal liberty. The dissenting opinion places the matter of principle as

follows:

19         When eight judges of this Court rendered the decision in M P Sharma in 1954

and later, six judges decided the controversy in Kharak Singh in 1962, the ascendant

and, even well established, doctrine governing the fundamental rights contained in

Part III was founded on the Gopalan principle. In Gopalan, Chief Justice Kania,

speaking for a majority of five of the Bench of six judges, construed the relationship

betweenArticles 19and21to be one of mutual exclusion. In this line of enquiry, what

was comprehended byArticle 19was excluded fromArticle 21.The seven freedoms

ofArticle 19were not subsumed in the fabric of life or personal liberty inArticle 21.19

Ibid, at pages 358-35917PART D


The consequence was that a law which curtailed one of the freedoms guaranteed byArticle 19would be required to answer the tests of reasonableness prescribed by

clauses 2 to 6 ofArticle 19and those alone. In the Gopalan perspective, free speech

and expression was guaranteed byArticle 19(1)(a)and was hence excluded from

personal liberty underArticle 21.Article 21was but a residue. Chief Justice Kania

held :

20         In Satwant Singh Sawhney v D Ramarathnam22 (“Satwant Singh

Sawhney”), Justice Hidayatullah, speaking for himself and Justice R S Bachawat, in

the dissenting view noticed the clear lines of distinction between the dissent of Justice

Subba Rao and the view of the majority in Kharak Singh. The observations of Justice

Hidayatullah indicate that if the right of locomotion is embodied byArticle 21of which

one aspect is covered byArticle 19(1)(d), that would in fact advance the minority view

in Kharak Singh:

21         The theory that the fundamental rights are water-tight compartments was

discarded in the judgment of eleven judges of this Court in Cooper. Gopalan had

adopted the view that a law of preventive detention would be tested for its validity only

with reference toArticle 22, which was a complete code relating to the subject.

Legislation on preventive detention did not, in this view, have to meet the touchstone

ofArticle 19(1)(d).The dissenting view of Justice Fazl Ali in Gopalan was noticed by23Ibid, at page 55420PART E


Justice J C Shah, speaking for this Court, in Cooper. The consequence of the

Gopalan doctrine was that the protection afforded by a guarantee of personal freedom

would be decided by the object of the State action in relation to the right of the

individual and not upon its effect upon the guarantee. Disagreeing with this view, the

Court in Cooper held thus :

22         The abrogation of the Gopalan doctrine in Cooper was revisited in a seven-

judge Bench decision in Maneka. Justice P N Bhagwati who delivered the leading

opinion of three Judges held that the judgment in Cooper affirms the dissenting24Cooper (Supra note 4), at page 289 (para 52)21PART E


opinion of Justice Subba Rao (in Kharak Singh) as expressing the valid constitutional

position. Hence in Maneka, the Court held that:

23         Following the decision in Maneka, the established constitutional doctrine is that

the expression ‘personal liberty’ inArticle 21covers a variety of rights, some of which25Maneka (Supra Note 5), at page 278 (para 5)22PART E


‘have been raised to the status of distinct fundamental rights’ and given additional

protection underArticle 19.Consequently, in Satwant Singh Sawhney, the right to

travel abroad was held to be subsumed withinArticle 21as a consequence of which

any deprivation of that right could be only by a ‘procedure established by law’. Prior

to the enactment of thePassports Act, 1967, there was no law regulating the right to

travel abroad as a result of which the order of the Passport Officer refusing a passport

was held to be invalid. The decision in Maneka carried the constitutional principle of

the   over-lapping   nature   of   fundamental     rights   to   its   logical   conclusion.

Reasonableness which is the foundation of the guarantee against arbitrary state

action underArticle 14infusesArticle 21.A law which provides for a deprivation of life

or personal liberty underArticle 21must lay down not just any procedure but a

procedure which is fair, just and reasonable.

24     The decisions in M P Sharma and Kharak Singh adopted a doctrinal position

on the relationship betweenArticles 19and21, based on the view of the majority in

Gopalan. This view stands abrogated particularly by the judgment in Cooper and the

subsequent statement of doctrine in Maneka. The decision in Maneka, in fact,

expressly recognized that it is the dissenting judgment of Justice Subba Rao in

Kharak Singh which represents the exposition of the correct constitutional principle.

The jurisprudential foundation which held the field sixty three years ago in M P

Sharma and fifty five years ago in Kharak Singh has given way to what is now a

settled position in constitutional law. Firstly, the fundamental rights emanate from

basic notions of liberty and dignity and the enumeration of some facets of liberty as23PART E


distinctly protected rights underArticle 19does not denudeArticle 21of its expansive

ambit. Secondly, the validity of a law which infringes the fundamental rights has to be

tested not with reference to the object of state action but on the basis of its effect on

the guarantees of freedom. Thirdly, the requirement ofArticle 14that state action

must not be arbitrary and must fulfil the requirement of reasonableness, imparts

meaning to the constitutional guarantees in Part III.



25    The doctrinal invalidation of the basic premise underlying the decisions in M P

Sharma and Kharak Singh still leaves the issue of whether privacy is a right protected

by Part III of the Constitution open for consideration. There are observations in both

decisions that the Constitution does not contain a specific protection of the right to

privacy. Presently, the matter can be looked at from the perspective of what actually

was the controversy in the two cases. M P Sharma was a case where a law

prescribing a search to obtain documents for investigating into offences was

challenged as being contrary to the guarantee against self-incrimination inArticle

20(3).The Court repelled the argument that a search for documents compelled a

person accused of an offence to be witness against himself. Unlike a notice to produce

documents, which is addressed to a person and whose compliance would constitute

a testimonial act, a search warrant and a seizure which follows are not testimonial

acts of a person to whom the warrant is addressed, within the meaning ofArticle 20(3).The Court having held this, the controversy in M P Sharma would rest at that. The

observations in M P Sharma to the effect that the constitution makers had not thought

it fit to subject the regulatory power of search and seizure to constitutional limitations24PART E


by recognising a fundamental right of privacy (like the US Fourth amendment), and

that there was no justification to impart it into a ‘totally different fundamental right’ are

at the highest, stray observations.

26     The decision in M P Sharma held that in the absence of a provision like the

Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution, a right to privacy cannot be read into the

Indian Constitution. The decision in M P Sharma did not decide whether a

constitutional right to privacy is protected by other provisions contained in the

fundamental rights including among them, the right to life and personal liberty underArticle 21.Hence the decision cannot be construed to specifically exclude the

protection of privacy under the framework of protected guarantees including those inArticles 19or 21. The absence of an express constitutional guarantee of privacy still

begs the question whether privacy is an element of liberty and, as an integral part of

human dignity, is comprehended within the protection of life as well.




27     The decision in Kharak Singh is noteworthy because while invalidating

Regulation 236(b) of the Police Regulations which provided for nightly domiciliary

visits, the majority construed this to be an unauthorized intrusion into a person’s home

and a violation of ordered liberty. While arriving at this conclusion, the majority

placed reliance on the privacy doctrine enunciated by Justice Frankfurter, speaking

for the US Supreme Court in Wolf v Colorado (the extract from Wolf cited in the

majority judgment specifically adverts to ‘privacy’ twice). Having relied on this doctrine25PART F


to invalidate domiciliary visits, the majority in Kharak Singh proceeded to repel the

challenge to other clauses of Regulation 236 on the ground that the right of privacy is

not guaranteed under the Constitution and henceArticle 21had no application. This

part of the judgment in Kharak Singh is inconsistent with the earlier part of the

decision. The decision of the majority in Kharak Singh suffers from an internal

inconsistency.

whether (as the Union of India postulates), the concept is so amorphous as to defy

description. The submission of the government is that the Court cannot recognize a

juristic concept which is so vague and uncertain that it fails to withstand constitutional

scrutiny. This makes it necessary to analyse the origins of privacy and to trace its

evolution.

29      The Greek philosopher Aristotle spoke of a division between the public sphere

of political affairs (which he termed the polis) and the personal sphere of human life

(termed oikos). This dichotomy may provide an early recognition of “a confidential

zone on behalf of the citizen”26. Aristotle’s distinction between the public and private

realms can be regarded as providing a basis for restricting governmental authority to

activities falling within the public realm. On the other hand, activities in the private


 Michael C. James, “A Comparative Analysis of the Right to Privacy in the United States, Canada and Europe”,26Connecticut Journal of International Law (Spring 2014), Vol. 29, Issue 2, at page 26126PART F


realm are more appropriately reserved for “private reflection, familial relations and

self-determination”27.

30      At a certain level, the evolution of the doctrine of privacy has followed the public

– private distinction. William Blackstone in his Commentaries on the Laws of

England (1765) spoke about this distinction while dividing wrongs into private wrongs

and public wrongs. Private wrongs are an infringement merely of particular rights

concerning individuals and are in the nature of civil injuries. Public wrongs constitute

a breach of general and public rights affecting the whole community and according to

him, are called crimes and misdemeanours.

31      John Stuart Mill in his essay, ‘On Liberty’ (1859) gave expression to the need

to preserve a zone within which the liberty of the citizen would be free from the

authority of the state. According to Mill :

32     Austin in his Lectures on Jurisprudence (1869) spoke of the distinction

between the public and the private realms : jus publicum and jus privatum.



The distinction between the public and private realms has its limitations. If the reason

for protecting privacy is the dignity of the individual, the rationale for its existence does

not cease merely because the individual has to interact with others in the public arena.

The extent to which an individual expects privacy in a public street may be different

from that which she expects in the sanctity of the home. Yet if dignity is the underlying

feature, the basis of recognising the right to privacy is not denuded in public spaces.

The extent of permissible state regulation may, however, differ based on the legitimate

concerns of governmental authority.

33     James Madison, who was the architect of the American Constitution,

contemplated the protection of the faculties of the citizen as an incident of the

inalienable property rights of human beings. In his words :

34       In an article published on 15 December 1890 in the Harvard Law Review,

Samuel D Warren and Louis Brandeis adverted to the evolution of the law to

incorporate within it, the right to life as “a recognition of man’s spiritual nature, of his

feelings and his intellect”31. As legal rights were broadened, the right to life had “come

to mean the right to enjoy life – the right to be let alone”. Recognizing that “only a

part of the pain, pleasure and profit of life lay in physical things” and that “thoughts,

emotions, and sensations demanded legal recognition”, Warren and Brandeis

revealed with a sense of perspicacity the impact of technology on the right to be let

alone:

35         The ringing observations of Warren and Brandeis on the impact of technology

have continued relevance today in a globalized world dominated by the internet and32Ibid, at pages 195-19633Ibid, at page 20530PART F


 information technology. As societies have evolved, so have the connotations and

 ambit of privacy.

36      Though many contemporary accounts attribute the modern conception of the

 ‘right to privacy’ to the Warren and Brandeis article, historical material indicates that it

 was Thomas Cooley who adopted the phrase “the right to be let alone”, in his

 Treatise on the Law of Torts34. Discussing personal immunity, Cooley stated:

37         The right to privacy was developed by Warren and Brandeis in the backdrop of

the dense urbanization which occurred particularly in the East Coast of the United

States. Between 1790 and 1890, the US population had risen from four million to sixty-

three million. The population of urban areas had grown over a hundred-fold since the

end of the civil war. In 1890, over eight million people had immigrated to the US.

Technological progress and rapid innovations had led to the private realm being

placed under stress :

38       Criminal libel actions were resorted to in the US during a part of the nineteenth

century but by 1890, they had virtually ceased to be “a viable protection for individual

privacy”42. The Sedition Act of 1789 expired in 1801. Before truth came to be accepted

as a defence in defamation actions, criminal libel prosecutions flourished in the State

courts.43 Similarly, truth was not regarded as a valid defence to a civil libel action in

much of the nineteenth century. By the time Warren and Brandeis wrote their article

in 1890, publication of the truth was perhaps no longer actionable under the law of

defamation. It was this breach or lacuna that they sought to fill up by speaking of the

right to privacy which would protect the control of the individual over her personality.44

The right to privacy evolved as a “leitmotif” representing “the long tradition of American

individualism”.45




39       Conscious as we are of the limitations with which comparative frameworks46 of

law and history should be evaluated, the above account is of significance. It reflects40Ibid, at page 941Ibid, at page 1042Ibid, at page 1243Ibid, at page 1444Ibid, at Pages 15-1645Id at Pages 21-2246Illustratively, the Centre for Internet and Society has two interesting articles tracing the origin of privacy within
 Classical Hindu Law and Islamic Law. See Ashna Ashesh and Bhairav Acharya ,“Locating Constructs of Privacy33PART G


the basic need of every individual to live with dignity. Urbanization and economic

development lead to a replacement of traditional social structures. Urban ghettos

replace the tranquillity of self-sufficient rural livelihoods. The need to protect the

privacy of the being is no less when development and technological change

continuously threaten to place the person into public gaze and portend to submerge

the individual into a seamless web of inter-connected lives.

his or her personality. It finds an origin in the notion that there are certain rights which

are natural to or inherent in a human being. Natural rights are inalienable because

they are inseparable from the human personality. The human element in life is

impossible to conceive without the existence of natural rights. In 1690, John Locke

had in his Second Treatise of Government observed that the lives, liberties and

estates of individuals are as a matter of fundamental natural law, a private preserve.

The idea of a private preserve was to create barriers from outside interference. In

1765, William Blackstone in his Commentaries on the Laws of England spoke of

a “natural liberty”. There were, in his view, absolute rights which were vested in the

individual by the immutable laws of nature. These absolute rights were divided into




within Classical Hindu Law”, The Centre for Internet and Society, available at https://cis-india.org/internet-
governance/blog/loading-constructs-of-privacy-within-classical-hindu-law. See also Vidushi Marda and Bhairav
Acharya, “Identifying Aspects of Privacy in Islamic Law”, The Centre for Internet and Society, available at
https://cis-india.org/internet-governance/blog/identifying-aspects-of-privacy-in-islamic-law34PART G


rights of personal security, personal liberty and property. The right of personal security

involved a legal and uninterrupted enjoyment of life, limbs, body, health and reputation

by an individual.

41       The notion that certain rights are inalienable was embodied in the American

Declaration of Independence (1776) in the following terms:

42       In 1921, Roscoe Pound, in his work titled “The Spirit of the Common Law”,

explained the meaning of natural rights:

43         In 1955, Edwin W Patterson in “A Pragmatist Looks At Natural Law and

Natural Rights” observed that rights which individuals while making a social compact

to create a government, reserve to themselves, are natural rights because they

originate in a condition of nature and survive the social compact. In his words:

44      Natural rights are not bestowed by the state. They inhere in human beings

because they are human. They exist equally in the individual irrespective of class or

strata, gender or orientation.

45         Distinguishing an inalienable right to an object from the object itself

emphasises the notion of inalienability. All human beings retain their inalienable rights

(whatever their situation, whatever their acts, whatever their guilt or innocence). The

concept of natural inalienable rights secures autonomy to human beings. But the

autonomy is not absolute, for the simple reason that, the concept of inalienable rights

postulates that there are some rights which no human being may alienate. While

natural rights protect the right of the individual to choose and preserve liberty, yet the

autonomy of the individual is not absolute or total. As a theoretical construct, it would

otherwise be strictly possible to hire another person to kill oneself or to sell oneself

into slavery or servitude. Though these acts are autonomous, they would be in

violation of inalienable rights. This is for the reason that:

46      The idea that individuals can have rights against the State that are prior to rights

created by explicit legislation has been developed as part of a liberal theory of law

propounded by Ronald Dworkin. In his seminal work titled “Taking Rights

Seriously”51 (1977), he states that:

48      In Gobind61, a Bench of three judges of this Court considered a challenge to

the validity of Regulations 855 and 856 of State Police Regulations under which a

history sheet was opened against the petitioner who had been placed under

surveillance. The Bench of three judges adverted to the decision in Kharak Singh

and to the validation of the Police Regulations (other than domiciliary visits at night).

By the time the decision was handed down in Gobind, the law in the US had evolved

and this Court took note of the decision in Griswold v Connecticut62 (“Griswold”) in

which a conviction under a statute on a charge of giving information and advice to

married persons on contraceptive methods was held to be invalid. This Court adverted

to the dictum that specific guarantees of the Bill of Rights have penumbras which

create zones of privacy. The Court also relied upon the US Supreme Court decision

in Jane Roe v Henry Wade63 in which the Court upheld the right of a married woman60Ibid, at page 479 (para 31)61(1975) 2 SCC 14862381 US 479 (1965)63410 US 113 (1973)41PART H


to terminate her pregnancy as a part of the right of personal privacy. The following

observations of Justice Mathew, who delivered the judgment of the Court do indicate

a constitutional recognition of the right to be let alone :

Observing that the concept of privacy overlaps with liberty, this Court noted thus :

In that case, the appellant was a doctor in the health service of a state. He was

accompanying a patient for surgery from Nagaland to Chennai and was tested when

he was to donate blood. The blood sample was found to be HIV+. The appellant

claiming to have been socially ostracized by the disclosure of his HIV+ status by the

hospital, filed a claim for damages before the National Consumer Disputes Redressal

Commission (NCDRC) alleging that the hospital had unauthorizedly disclosed his HIV

status resulting in his marriage being called off and in social opprobrium. Justice

Saghir Ahmad, speaking for a Bench of two judges of this Court, adverted to the duty

of the doctor to maintain secrecy in relation to the patient but held that there is an

exception to the rule of confidentiality where public interest will override that duty. The

judgment of this Court dwelt on the right of privacy underArticle 21and other

provisions of the Constitution relating to the fundamental rights and the Directive

Principles:

judge Bench of this Court inState of Karnataka v Krishnappa91held:

domiciliary visits that provided guidance on the issue. The evaluation of Kharak

Singh was in the following terms:

The above safeguards must necessarily be read into the provision103Supra Note 95, at page 516 (para 36)104Ibid, at page 518 (para 39)64PART H


                    relating to search and inspection and seizure so as to save it from
                    any unconstitutionality.”105


Hence the Court repudiated the notion that a person who places documents with a

bank would, as a result, forsake an expectation of confidentiality. In the view of the

Court, even if the documents cease to be at a place other than in the custody and

control of the customer, privacy attaches to persons and not places and hence the

protection of privacy is not diluted. Moreover, in the view of the Court, there has to be

a reasonable basis or material for the Collector to form an opinion that the documents

in the possession of the bank would secure the purpose of investigating into an act of

fraud or an omission in relation to duty. The safeguards which the Court introduced

were regarded as being implicit in the need to make a search of this nature

reasonable. The second part of the ruling of the Court is equally important for it finds

fault with a statutory provision which allows an excessive delegation of the power

conferred upon the Collector to inspect documents. The provision, the Court rules,

would allow the customers’ privacy to be breached by non-governmental persons.

Hence the statute, insofar as it allowed the Collector to authorize any person to seek

inspection, would be unenforceable. In the view of the Court:

charge of the welfare institution was bound to respect the personal autonomy of the

woman.

72         The decision in Suchita Srivastava dwells on the statutory right of a woman

under theMTP Actto decide whether or not to consent to a termination of pregnancy

and to have that right respected where she does not consent to termination. The

statutory recognition of the right is relatable to the constitutional right to make

reproductive choices which has been held to be an ingredient of personal liberty underArticle 21.The Court deduced the existence of such a right from a woman’s right to

privacy, dignity and bodily integrity.

120

Ibid, at page 15 (para 22)72PART H


73      InBhavesh Jayanti Lakhani v State of Maharashtra121, this Court dealt with

a challenge to the validity of an arrest warrant issued by a US court and a red corner

notice issued by INTERPOL on the ground that the petitioner had, in violation of an

interim custody order, returned to India with the child. The Court did not accept the

submission that the CBI, by coordinating with INTERPOL had breached the

petitioner’s right of privacy. However, during the course of the discussion, this Court

held as follows:

74      InSelvi v State of Karnataka124 (“Selvi”), a Bench of three judges of this Court

dealt with a challenge to the validity of three investigative techniques: narco-analysis,

polygraph test (lie-detector test) and Brain Electrical Activation Profile (BEAP) on the

ground that they implicate the fundamental rights underArticles 20(3)and21of the

Constitution. The Court held that the results obtained through an involuntary121(2009) 9 SCC 551122Ibid, at pages 584-585 (para 102)123Ibid, at page 585 (para 103)124(2010) 7 SCC 26373PART H


administration of these tests are within the scope of a testimonial, attracting the

protective shield ofArticle 20(3)of the Constitution. Chief Justice Balakrishnan

adverted to the earlier decisions rendered in the context of privacy and noted that thus

far, judicial understanding had stressed mostly on the protection of the body and

physical actions induced by the state. The Court emphasised that while the right

against self-incrimination is a component of personal liberty underArticle 21, privacy

under the constitution has a meeting point withArticle 20(3)as well. In the view of

the Court:

75    InBhabani Prasad Jena v Orissa State Commissionfor Women126, the Court

was considering the question whether the High Court was justified in issuing a

direction for a DNA test of a child and the appellant who, according to the mother of

the child, was the father. It was held that:

76      InAmar Singh v Union of India128, a Bench of two judges of this Court dealt

with a petition underArticle 32alleging that the fundamental right to privacy of the126(2010) 8 SCC 633127Ibid, at page 642 (para 21)128(2011) 7 SCC 6975PART H


petitioner was being breached by intercepting his conversations on telephone services

provided by a service provider. The Court held:

77         In Ram Jethmalani v Union of India130 (“Ram Jethmalani”), a Bench of two

judges was dealing with a public interest litigation concerned with unaccounted

monies and seeking the appointment of a Special Investigating Team to follow and

investigate a money trail. This Court held that the revelation of the details of the bank

accounts of individuals without the establishment of a prima facie ground of

wrongdoing would be a violation of the right to privacy. This Court observed thus:

The latter cannot be sacrificed on the anvil of fervid desire to find
                    instantaneous solutions to systemic problems such as unaccounted
                    for monies, for it would lead to dangerous circumstances, in which
                    vigilante investigations, inquisitions and rabble rousing, by masses
                    of other citizens could become the order of the day. The right of
                    citizens to petition this Court for upholding of fundamental rights is
                    granted in order that citizens, inter alia, are ever vigilant about the
                    functioning of the State in order to protect the constitutional project.
                    That right cannot be extended to being inquisitors of fellow citizens.
                    An inquisitorial order, where citizens' fundamental right to
                    privacy is breached by fellow citizens is destructive of social
                    order. The notion of fundamental rights, such as a right to
                    privacy as part of right to life, is not merely that the State is
                    enjoined from derogating from them. It also includes the
                    responsibility of the State to uphold them against the actions
                    of others in the society, even in the context of exercise of
                    fundamental rights by those others.”131 (emphasis supplied)



The Court held that while the State could access details of the bank accounts of

citizens as an incident of its power to investigate and prosecute crime, this would not

enable a private citizen to compel a citizen to reveal bank accounts to the public at

large.

131

Ibid, at pages 35-36 (paras 83-84)77PART H


78      InSanjoy Narayan v HighCourt of Allahabad132, the two-judge Bench dealt

with a contempt petition in respect of publication of an incorrect report in a newspaper

which tarnished the image of the Chief Justice of a High Court. The Court made the

following observations:

79      In Ramlila Maidan Incident v Home Secretary, Union of India134, Justice B

S Chauhan in a concurring judgment held that:

80        The judgment of a Bench of two judges of this Court inBihar Public Service

Commission v Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi136dealt with the provisions ofSection

8(1)(g)of the Right to Information Act, 2005. A person claiming to be a public-spirited

citizen sought information under the statute from the Bihar Public Service Commission

on a range of matters relating to interviews conducted by it on two days. The

commission disclosed the information save and except for the names of the interview

board. The High Court directed disclosure.Section 8(1)(g)provides an exemption

from disclosure of information of the following nature:

81      The decisionLillu @Rajesh v State of Haryana138emphasized the right of

rape survivors to privacy, physical and mental integrity and dignity. The Court held

thus:

82         InThalappalam Service Cooperative Bank Limited v State of Kerala140,

anotherBench of two judges considered the correctness of a decision of the Kerala

High Court which upheld a circular issued by the Registrar of Cooperative Societies.

By the circular all cooperative institutions under his administrative control were

declared to be public authorities within the meaning ofSection 2(h)of the Right to

Information Act, 2005.Section 8(j)contains an exemption from the disclosure of

personal information which has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or

which would cause “unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual” unless the

authority is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies its disclosure. This Court

observed that the right to privacy has been recognized as a part ofArticle 21of the

Constitution and the statutory provisions contained inSection 8(j)of the RTI Act have

been enacted by the legislature in recognition of the constitutional protection of

privacy. The Court held thus:

83         InManoj Narula v Union of India143, a Constitution Bench of this Court was

hearing a petition filed in the public interest complaining of the increasing

criminalization of politics. Dealing with the provisions ofArticle 75(1)of the

Constitution, Justice Dipak Misra, while explaining the doctrine of “constitutional

implications”, considered whether the Court could read a disqualification into the

provisions made by the Constitution in addition to those which have been provided by

the legislature. In that context, the leading judgment observes:

Similarly, inJoginder Kumar v. State of U.P.[(1994) 4 SCC 260 :

84         In National Legal Services Authority v Union of India145 (“NALSA”), a

Bench of two judges, while dealing with the rights of transgenders, adverted to

international conventions acceded to by India including the UDHR and ICCPR.

Provisions in these conventions which confer a protection against arbitrary and

unlawful interference with a person’s privacy, family and home would, it was held, be

read in a manner which harmonizes the fundamental rights contained inArticles 14,

15, 19and21with India’s international obligations. Justice K S Radhakrishnan held

that:

Ibid, at page 490 (para 72)147Ibid, at page 490 (para 73)148Ibid, at page 491 (para 75)84PART H


NALSA indicates the rationale for grounding of a right to privacy in the protection of

gender identity withinArticle 15.The intersection ofArticle 15withArticle 21locates

a constitutional right to privacy as an expression of individual autonomy, dignity and

identity. NALSA indicates that the right to privacy does not necessarily have to fall

within the ambit of any one provision in the chapter on fundamental rights. Intersecting

rights recognise the right to privacy. Though primarily, it is in the guarantee of life and

personal liberty underArticle 21that a constitutional right to privacy dwells, it is

enriched by the values incorporated in other rights which are enumerated in Part III of

the Constitution.

85        InABC v The State (NCT of Delhi)149, the Court dealt with the question

whether it is imperative for an unwed mother to specifically notify the putative father

of the child of her petition for appointment as guardian of her child. It was stated by

the mother of the child that she does not want the future of her child to be marred by

any controversy regarding his paternity, which would indubitably result should the

father refuse to acknowledge the child as his own. It was her contention that her own

fundamental right to privacy will be violated if she is compelled to disclose the name

and particulars of the father of her child. Looking into the interest of the child, the

Bench directed that “if a single parent/unwed mother applies for the issuance of a Birth

Certificate for a child born from her womb, the Authorities concerned may only require149(2015) 10 SCC 185PART H


her to furnish an affidavit to this effect, and must thereupon issue the Birth Certificate,

unless there is a Court direction to the contrary”150.86         While considering the constitutional validity of theConstitution (Ninety-Ninth

Amendment) Act, 2014which enunciated an institutional process for the appointment

of judges, the concurring judgment of Justice Madan B Lokur in Supreme Court

Advocates onRecord Association v Union of India151dealt with privacy issues

involved if disclosures were made about a candidate under consideration for

appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court. Dealing with the right to

know of the general public on the one hand and the right to privacy on the other hand,

Justice Lokur noted that the latter is an “implicit fundamental right that all people

enjoy”. Justice Lokur observed thus:

87         A comprehensive analysis of precedent has been necessary because it

indicates the manner in which the debate on the existence of a constitutional right to

privacy has progressed. The content of the constitutional right to privacy and its

limitations have proceeded on a case to case basis, each precedent seeking to build

upon and follow the previous formulations. The doctrinal foundation essentially rests

upon the trilogy of M P Sharma – Kharak Singh – Gobind upon which subsequent

decisions including those in Rajagopal, PUCL, Canara Bank, Selvi and NALSA have

contributed. Reconsideration of the doctrinal basis cannot be complete without

evaluating what the trilogy of cases has decided.

88         M P Sharma dealt with a challenge to a search on the ground that the statutory

provision which authorized it, violated the guarantee against self-incrimination inArticle 20(3).In the absence of a specific provision like the Fourth Amendment to the

US Constitution in the Indian Constitution, the Court answered the challenge by its

ruling that an individual who is subject to a search during the course of which material

is seized does not make a voluntary testimonial statement of the nature that would

attractArticle 20(3).The Court distinguished a compulsory search from a voluntary

statement of disclosure in pursuance of a notice issued by an authority to produce152Ibid, at page 676 (para 953)87PART H


documents. It was the former category that was held to be involved in a compulsive

search, which the Court held would not attract the guarantee against self-

incrimination. The judgment, however, proceeded further to hold that in the absence

of the right to privacy having been enumerated in the Constitution, a provision like the

Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution could not be read into our own. The

observation in regard to the absence of the right to privacy in our Constitution was

strictly speaking, not necessary for the decision of the Court in M P Sharma and the

observation itself is no more than a passing observation. Moreover, the decision does

not adjudicate upon whether privacy could be a constitutionally protected right under

any other provision such asArticle 21or underArticle 19.89     Kharak Singh does not contain a reference to M P Sharma. The decision of

the majority in Kharak Singh is essentially divided into two parts; the first dealing with

the validity of a regulation for nocturnal domiciliary visits (which was struck down) and

the second dealing with the rest of the regulation (which was upheld). The decision

on the first part, which dealt with Regulation 236(b) conveys an inescapable

impression that the regulation invaded the sanctity of the home and was a violation of

ordered liberty. Though the reasoning of the Court does not use the expression

‘privacy’, it alludes to the decision of the US Supreme Court in Wolf v Colorado, which

deals with privacy. Besides, the portion extracted in the judgment has a reference to

privacy specifically at two places. While holding domiciliary visits at night to be invalid,

the Court drew sustenance from the right to life underArticle 21which means88PART H


something more than a mere animal existence. The right underArticle 21includes the

enjoyment of those faculties which render the right meaningful. Hence, the first part

of the decision in Kharak Singh represents an amalgam of life, personal liberty and

privacy. It protects interests which are grounded in privacy under the rubric of liberty.

The difficulty in construing the decision arises because in the second part of its

decision, the majority upheld the rest of the regulation and observed (while doing so)

that there is an absence of a protected right to privacy under the Constitution. These

observations in the second part are at variance with those dealing with the first. The

view about the absence of a right to privacy is an isolated observation which cannot

coexist with the essential determination rendered on the first aspect of the regulation.

Subsequent Benches of this Court in the last five decades and more, have attempted

to make coherent doctrine out of the uneasy coexistence between the first and the

second parts of the decision in Kharak Singh. Several of them rely on the protection

of interests grounded in privacy in the first part, under the conceptual foundation of

ordered liberty.

90     Gobind proceeded on the basis of an assumption and explains what according

to the Court would be the content of the right to privacy if it is held to be a constitutional

right. Gobind underlines that the right would be intrinsic to ordered liberty and would

cover intimate matters such as family, marriage and procreation. Gobind, while

recognizing that the right would not be absolute and would be subject to the regulatory

power of the State, conditioned the latter on the existence of a compelling state89PART H


interest. The decision also brings in the requirement of a narrow tailoring of the

regulation to meet the needs of a compelling interest. The Bench which decided

Gobind adverted to the decision in Kharak Singh (though not M P Sharma). Be that

as it may, Gobind has proceeded on the basis of an assumption that the right to

privacy is a constitutionally protected right in India. Subsequent decisions of this Court

have treated the formulation of a right to privacy as one that emerges out of Kharak

Singh or Gobind (or both). Evidently, it is the first part of the decision in Kharak

Singh which is construed as having recognized a constitutional entitlement to privacy

without reconciling the second part which contains a specific observation on the

absence of a protected constitutional right to privacy in the Constitution. Succeeding

Benches of smaller strength were not obviously in a position to determine the

correctness of the M P Sharma and Kharak Singh formulations. They had to weave

a jurisprudence of privacy as new challenges emerged from a variety of sources: wire-

tapping, narco-analysis, gender based identity, medical information, informational

autonomy and other manifestations of privacy. As far as the decisions following upon

Gobind are concerned, it does emerge that the assumptions which find specific

mention in several parts of the decision were perhaps not adequately placed in

perspective. Gobind has been construed by subsequent Benches as affirming the

right to privacy.

91     The right to privacy has been traced in the decisions which have been rendered

over more than four decades to the guarantee of life and personal liberty inArticle 2190PART H


and the freedoms set out inArticle 19.In addition, India’s commitment to a world order

founded on respect for human rights has been noticed along with the specific articles

of the UDHR and the ICCPR which embody the right to privacy. 153 In the view of this

Court, international law has to be construed as a part of domestic law in the absence

of legislation to the contrary and, perhaps more significantly, the meaning of

constitutional guarantees must be illuminated by the content of international

conventions to which India is a party. Consequently, as new cases brought new issues

and problems before the Court, the content of the right to privacy has found

elaboration in these diverse contexts. These would include telephone tapping (PUCL),

prior restraints on publication of material on a death row convict (Rajagopal),

inspection and search of confidential documents involving the banker - customer

relationship (Canara Bank), disclosure of HIV status (Mr X v Hospital Z), food

preferences and animal slaughter (Hinsa Virodhak Sangh), medical termination of

pregnancy (Suchita Srivastava), scientific tests in criminal investigation (Selvi),

disclosure of bank accounts held overseas (Ram Jethmalani) and the right of

transgenders (NALSA). Early cases dealt with police regulations authorising

intrusions on liberty, such as surveillance. As Indian society has evolved, the assertion

of the right to privacy has been considered by this Court in varying contexts replicating

the choices and autonomy of the individual citizen.153See Rishika Taneja and Sidhant Kumar, Privacy Law: Principles, Injunctions and Compensation, Eastern
Book Company (2014), for a comprehensive account on the right to privacy and privacy laws in India.91PART I


92        The deficiency, however, is in regard to a doctrinal formulation of the basis on

which it can be determined as to whether the right to privacy is constitutionally

protected. M P Sharma need not have answered the question; Kharak Singh dealt

with it in a somewhat inconsistent formulation while Gobind rested on assumption. M

P Sharma being a decision of eight judges, this Bench has been called upon to decide

on the objection of the Union of India to the existence of such a right in the first place.

resolved to constitute India into a Republic which (among other things) is Sovereign

and Democratic and to secure to all its citizens:

(1973) 4 SCC 22593PART I


Jurisprudence on dignity



96        Over the last four decades, our constitutional jurisprudence has recognised the

inseparable relationship between protection of life and liberty with dignity. Dignity as

a constitutional value finds expression in the Preamble. The constitutional vision

seeks the realisation of justice (social, economic and political); liberty (of thought,

expression, belief, faith and worship); equality (as a guarantee against arbitrary

treatment of individuals) and fraternity (which assures a life of dignity to every

individual). These constitutional precepts exist in unity to facilitate a humane and

compassionate society. The individual is the focal point of the Constitution because it

is in the realisation of individual rights that the collective well being of the community

is determined. Human dignity is an integral part of the Constitution. Reflections of

dignity are found in the guarantee against arbitrariness (Article 14), the lamps of

freedom (Article 19) and in the right to life and personal liberty (Article 21).



97        InPrem Shankar Shukla v Delhi Administration156, which arose from the

handcuffing of the prisoners, Justice Krishna Iyer, speaking for a three-judge Bench

of this Court held:

98      A Bench of two judges inFrancis Coralie Mullin v Union Territory of Delhi159

(“Francis Coralie”) while construing the entitlement of a detenue under theConservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities

(COFEPOSA) Act, 1974to have an interview with a lawyer and the members of his

family held that:

99      InBandhua Mukti Morcha v Union of India163, a Bench of three judges of this

Court while dealing with individuals who were living in bondage observed that:

100     Dealing with an allegation that activists of an organization were arrested and

paraded throughout the town by the police and were beaten up in police custody, this

Court in Khedat Mazdoor Chetna Sangath v State of M P165 held that:

101     Human dignity was construed inM Nagaraj v Union of India168by a

Constitution Bench of this Court to be intrinsic to and inseparable from human

existence. Dignity, the Court held, is not something which is conferred and which can

be taken away, because it is inalienable:

102     InMaharashtra University of Health Sciences v Satchikitsa Prasarak

Mandal171, this Court held that the dignity of the individual is a core constitutional

concept. In Selvi, this Court recognised that:

103     InDr Mehmood Nayyar Azam v State of Chhattisgarh173, this Court noted

that when dignity is lost, life goes into oblivion. The same emphasis on dignity finds

expression in the decision in NALSA.

104     The same principle was more recently reiterated inShabnam v Union of

India174in the following terms:

105     The recent decision inJeeja Ghosh v Union of India176construed the

constitutional protection afforded to human dignity. The Court observed:

106     Life is precious in itself. But life is worth living because of the freedoms which

enable each individual to live life as it should be lived. The best decisions on how life

should be lived are entrusted to the individual. They are continuously shaped by the

social milieu in which individuals exist. The duty of the state is to safeguard the ability

to take decisions – the autonomy of the individual – and not to dictate those decisions.

‘Life’ within the meaning ofArticle 21is not confined to the integrity of the physical176(2016) 7 SCC 761177Aharon Barak, Human Dignity- The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right, Cambridge University
Press (2015)178Supra Note 176, at page 792 (para 37)99PART I


body. The right comprehends one’s being in its fullest sense. That which facilitates

the fulfilment of life is as much within the protection of the guarantee of life.




107       To live is to live with dignity. The draftsmen of the Constitution defined their

vision of the society in which constitutional values would be attained by emphasising,

among other freedoms, liberty and dignity. So fundamental is dignity that it permeates

the core of the rights guaranteed to the individual by Part III. Dignity is the core which

unites the fundamental rights because the fundamental rights seek to achieve for each

individual the dignity of existence. Privacy with its attendant values assures dignity to

the individual and it is only when life can be enjoyed with dignity can liberty be of true

substance. Privacy ensures the fulfilment of dignity and is a core value which the

protection of life and liberty is intended to achieve.Fundamental Rights cases


108       InGolak Nath v State of Punjab179, there was a challenge to thePunjab

Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953and to the Mysore Land Reforms Act (as

amended) upon their inclusion in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution.




Chief Justice Subba Rao dwelt on the rule of law and its purpose in ensuring that

every authority constituted by the Constitution is subject to it and functions within its179(1967) 2 SCR 762100PART I


parameters. One of the purposes of constraining governmental power was to shield

the fundamental freedoms against legislative majorities. This thought is reflected in

the following extract from the judgment of Chief Justice Subba Rao:

109   In Kesavananda Bharati, a Bench of 13 judges considered the nature of the

amending power conferred byArticle 368and whether the exercise of the amending

power was subject to limitations in its curtailment of the fundamental freedoms. Chief

Justice Sikri held that the fundamental rights are inalienable. In his view, the Universal

Declaration of Human Rights had to be utilised to interpret the Constitution having

regard to the mandate ofArticle 51.India, having acceded to the Universal

Declaration, Sikri, C.J. held that the treatment of rights as inalienable must guide the

interpretation of the Court. The Chief Justice relied upon a line of precedent holding

these rights to be natural and inalienable and observed:

PART I


                   “I have no doubt that the framers of our Constitution drew the same
                   distinction and classed the natural right or capacity of a citizen ‘to
                   acquire, hold and dispose of property’ with other natural rights and
                   freedoms inherent in the status of a free citizen and embodied them
                   inArticle 19(1)… (ibid, p. 597)” (Emphasis supplied).

                   “For all these reasons, I am of opinion that under the scheme of the
                   Constitution, all those broad and basic freedoms inherent in the
                   status of a citizen as a free man are embodied and protected from
                   invasion by the State under clause (1) of Article 19…” (ibid, p. 600)
                   (Emphasis supplied).

(iii) “The people, however, regard certain rights as paramount,
                   because they embrace liberty of action to the individual in
                   matters of private life, social intercourse and share in the
                   Government of the country and other spheres. The people who
                   vested the three limbs of Government with their power and
                   authority, at the same time kept back these rights of citizens and
                   also some times of non-citizens, and made them inviolable except
                   under certain conditions. The rights thus kept back are placed in
                   Part III of the Constitution, which is headed ‘Fundamental Rights’,
                   and the conditions under which these rights can be abridged are
                   also indicated in that Part. (Per Hidayatullah,J. in Ujjambai v. State
                   of U.P. [(1963) 1 SCR 778, 926-27 : AIR 1962 SC 1621]) (Emphasis
                   supplied).

301. The High Court Allahabad has described them as follows:

Justices Hegde and Mukherjea emphasised that the primary object before the

Constituent Assembly were: (i) to constitute India into a sovereign, democratic

republic and (ii) to secure its citizens the rights mentioned in it. Hence, the learned

Judges found it impossible to accept that the Constitution makers would have made

a provision in the Constitution itself for the destruction of the very ideals which they

had embodied in the fundamental rights. Hence, Parliament had no power to abrogate

the fundamental features of the Constitution including among them “the essential

features of the individual freedoms secured to the citizens”.

“On a careful consideration of the various aspects of the case, we
                    are convinced that the Parliament has no power to abrogate or183Ibid, at page 366 (para 292)184Ibid, at page 454 (para 582)104PART I


                   emasculate the basic elements or fundamental features of the
                   Constitution such as the sovereignty of India, the democratic
                   character of our polity, the unity of the country, the essential
                   features of the individual freedoms secured to the citizens. Nor
                   has the Parliament the power to revoke the mandate to build a
                   welfare State and egalitarian society. These limitations are only
                   illustrative and not exhaustive. Despite these limitations, however,
                   there can be no question that the amending power is a wide power
                   and it reaches every Article and every part of the Constitution. That
                   power can be used to reshape the Constitution to fulfil the obligation
                   imposed on the State. It can also be used to reshape the
                   Constitution within the limits mentioned earlier, to make it an
                   effective instrument for social good. We are unable to agree with
                   the contention that in order to build a welfare State, it is
                   necessary to destroy some of the human freedoms. That, at
                   any rate is not the perspective of our Constitution. Our
                   Constitution envisages that the State should without delay
                   make available to all the citizens of this country the real
                   benefits of those freedoms in a democratic way. Human
                   freedoms are lost gradually and imperceptibly and their destruction
                   is generally followed by authoritarian rule. That is what history has
                   taught us. Struggle between liberty and power is eternal. Vigilance
                   is the price that we like every other democratic society have to pay
                   to safeguard the democratic values enshrined in our Constitution.
                   Even the best of Governments are not averse to have more and
                   more power to carry out their plans and programmes which they
                   may sincerely believe to be in public interest. But a freedom once
                   lost is hardly ever regained except by revolution. Every
                   encroachment on freedom sets a pattern for further encroachments.
                   Our constitutional plan is to eradicate poverty without
                   destruction of individual freedoms.”185 (emphasis supplied)


Justice Jaganmohan Reddy held that:

The Constitution, in this view, is founded on “the bedrock of the balance between

Parts III and IV” and to give absolute primacy to one over the other would be to disturb

the harmony of the Constitution. In the view of the Chief Justice:190

No waiver of Fundamental Rights


112        In Behram Khurshed Pesikaka v The State of Bombay193, Chief Justice

Mahajan, speaking for the Constitution Bench, noted the link between the

constitutional vision contained in the Preamble and the position of the fundamental

rights as a means to facilitate its fulfilment. Though Part III embodies fundamental

rights, this was construed to be part of the wider notion of securing the vision of justice192Ibid, at page 654 (para 57)193(1955) 1 SCR 613108PART I


of the founding fathers and, as a matter of doctrine, the rights guaranteed were held

not to be capable of being waived. Mahajan, CJ, observed:

113        The submission that recognising the right to privacy is an exercise which would

require a constitutional amendment and cannot be a matter of judicial interpretation is

not an acceptable doctrinal position. The argument assumes that the right to privacy

is independent of the liberties guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. There lies

the error. The right to privacy is an element of human dignity. The sanctity of privacy

lies in its functional relationship with dignity. Privacy ensures that a human being can

lead a life of dignity by securing the inner recesses of the human personality from

unwanted intrusion. Privacy recognises the autonomy of the individual and the right

of every person to make essential choices which affect the course of life. In doing so

privacy recognises that living a life of dignity is essential for a human being to fulfil the194Ibid, at pages 653-654109PART I


liberties and freedoms which are the cornerstone of the Constitution. To recognise the

value of privacy as a constitutional entitlement and interest is not to fashion a new

fundamental right by a process of amendment through judicial fiat.Neither are the

judges nor is the process of judicial review entrusted with the constitutional

responsibility to amend the Constitution. But judicial review certainly has the task

before it of determining the nature and extent of the freedoms available to each person

under the fabric of those constitutional guarantees which are protected. Courts have

traditionally discharged that function and in the context ofArticle 21itself, as we have

already noted, a panoply of protections governing different facets of a dignified

existence has been held to fall within the protection ofArticle 21.114       InOlga Tellis v Bombay Municipal Corporation195, Chandrachud C J, while

explaining the ambit ofArticle 21found a rationale for protecting the right to livelihood

as an incident of the right to life. For, as the Court held, deprivation of livelihood would

result in the abrogation of the right to life:

Deprive a person of his right to livelihood and you shall have
                deprived him of his life…”196



115     In Unnikrishnan v State of Andhra Pradesh197, Justice Jeevan Reddy,

speaking for this Court, held that though the right to education (as the Constitution

then stood) was not “stated expressly as a fundamental right” in Part III, that would

not militate against its being protected under the rubric of life underArticle 21.These

decisions have been ultimately guided by the object of a Constitutional Court which

must be to expand the boundaries of fundamental human freedoms rather than to

attenuate their content through a constricted judicial interpretation In Maneka, it has

been stated that:

116     Now, would this Court in interpreting the Constitution freeze the content of

constitutional guarantees and provisions to what the founding fathers perceived? The

Constitution was drafted and adopted in a historical context.                      The vision of the

founding fathers was enriched by the histories of suffering of those who suffered196Ibid, at page 572 (para 32)197(1993) 1 SCC 645198Maneka (Supra note 5), at page 280 (para 5)111PART I


oppression and a violation of dignity both here and elsewhere. Yet, it would be difficult

to dispute that many of the problems which contemporary societies face would not

have been present to the minds of the most perspicacious draftsmen. No generation,

including the present, can have a monopoly over solutions or the confidence in its

ability to foresee the future. As society evolves, so must constitutional doctrine. The

institutions which the Constitution has created must adapt flexibly to meet the

challenges in a rapidly growing knowledge economy.              Above all, constitutional

interpretation is but a process in achieving justice, liberty and dignity to every citizen.




117       Undoubtedly, there have been aberrations. In the evolution of the doctrine in

India, which places the dignity of the individual and freedoms and liberties at the

forefront, there have been a few discordant notes. Two of them need attention.

this Court was whether an order issued by the President underArticle 359(1)of the

Constitution suspends the right of every person to move any Court for the enforcement

of the right to personal liberty underArticle 21upon being detained under a law

providing for preventive detention. The submission of the detenues in this Court was199(1976) 2 SCC 521112PART I


that the suspension of the remedy to enforceArticle 21does not automatically entail

suspension of the right or the rule of law and that even during an emergency the rule

of law could not be suspended. A majority of four judges of this Court (Justice H R

Khanna dissenting) held that:

The view taken by Justice Khanna must be accepted, and accepted in reverence for

the strength of its thoughts and the courage of its convictions.




121    When histories of nations are written and critiqued, there are judicial decisions

at the forefront of liberty. Yet others have to be consigned to the archives, reflective119PART I


of what was, but should never have been. The decision of the US Supreme Court in

Buck v Bell210 ranks amongst the latter. It was a decision in which Justice Oliver

Wendell Holmes Jr. accepted the forcible sterilization by tubular ligation of Carrie

Bucks as part of a programme of state sponsored eugenic sterilization. Justice

Holmes, while upholding the programme opined that: “three generations of imbeciles

is enough”211. In the same vein was the decision of the US Supreme Court in

Korematsu v United States212, upholding the imprisonment of a citizen in a

concentration camp solely because of his Japanese ancestry.


ADM Jabalpur must be and is accordingly overruled.We also overrule the decision

inUnion of India v Bhanudas Krishna Gawde213, which followed ADM Jabalpur.122     InI R Coelho v State of Tamil Nadu214, this Court took the view that ADM

Jabalpur has been impliedly overruled by various subsequent decisions:

123        As a result of the Forty-Fourth Amendment to the Constitution,Article 359has

been amended to provide that during the operation of a proclamation of emergency,

the power of the President to declare a suspension of the right to move a Court for

the enforcement of the fundamental rights contained in Part III shall not extend toArticles 20and21.

constitutional jurisprudence on the right to privacy finds reflection in a two judge Bench

decision of this Court inSuresh Kumar Koushal v NAZfoundation216 (“Koushal”).

The proceedings before this Court arose from a judgment217 of the Delhi High Court

holding thatSection 377of the Indian Penal Code, insofar as it criminalises

consensual sexual acts of adults in private is violative ofArticles 14, 15and21of the

Constitution. The Delhi High Court, however, clarified that Section 377 will continue

to govern non-consensual penile, non-vaginal sex and penile non-vaginal sex

involving minors. Among the grounds of challenge was that the statutory provision

constituted an infringement of the rights to dignity and privacy. The Delhi High Court

held that:

125        When the matter travelled to this Court, Justice Singhvi, speaking for the Bench

dealt with several grounds including the one based on privacy – dignity. The Court

recognised that the right to privacy which is recognised byArticle 12of the Universal

Declaration andArticle 17of ICCPR has been read intoArticle 21“through expansive

reading of the right to life and liberty”. This Court, however, found fault with the basis

of the judgment of the High Court for the following, among other reasons:

126        Neither of the above reasons can be regarded as a valid constitutional basis

for disregarding a claim based on privacy underArticle 21of the Constitution. That

“a miniscule fraction of the country’s population constitutes lesbians, gays, bisexuals

or transgenders” (as observed in the judgment of this Court) is not a sustainable basis

to deny the right to privacy. The purpose of elevating certain rights to the stature of

guaranteed fundamental rights is to insulate their exercise from the disdain of

majorities, whether legislative or popular. The guarantee of constitutional rights does

not depend upon their exercise being favourably regarded by majoritarian opinion.

The test of popular acceptance does not furnish a valid basis to disregard rights which

are conferred with the sanctity of constitutional protection.                  Discrete and insular219Koushal(Supra note 216), at page 69-70 (para 66)220Ibid, at page 78 (para 77)123PART I


minorities face grave dangers of discrimination for the simple reason that their views,

beliefs or way of life does not accord with the ‘mainstream’. Yet in a democratic

Constitution founded on the rule of law, their rights are as sacred as those conferred

on other citizens to protect their freedoms and liberties. Sexual orientation is an

essential attribute of privacy. Discrimination against an individual on the basis of

sexual orientation is deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual.

Equality demands that the sexual orientation of each individual in society must be

protected on an even platform. The right to privacy and the protection of sexual

orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed byArticles 14, 15and21of the Constitution.

127   The view in Koushal that the High Court had erroneously relied upon

international precedents “in its anxiety to protect the so-called rights of LGBT.

persons” is similarly, in our view, unsustainable. The rights of the lesbian, gay,

bisexual and transgender population cannot be construed to be “so-called rights”. The

expression “so-called” seems to suggest the exercise of a liberty in the garb of a right

which is illusory. This is an inappropriate construction of the privacy based claims of

the LGBT population. Their rights are not “so-called” but are real rights founded on

sound constitutional doctrine. They inhere in the right to life. They dwell in privacy and

dignity. They constitute the essence of liberty and freedom. Sexual orientation is an

essential component of identity. Equal protection demands protection of the identity

of every individual without discrimination.

124PART I


128   The decision in Koushal presents a de minimis rationale when it asserts that

there have been only two hundred prosecutions for violating Section 377. The de

minimis hypothesis is misplaced because the invasion of a fundamental right is not

rendered tolerable when a few, as opposed to a large number of persons, are

subjected to hostile treatment. The reason why such acts of hostile discrimination are

constitutionally impermissible is because of the chilling effect which they have on the

exercise of the fundamental right in the first place. For instance, pre-publication

restraints such as censorship are vulnerable because they discourage people from

exercising their right to free speech because of the fear of a restraint coming into

operation. The chilling effect on the exercise of the right poses a grave danger to the

unhindered fulfilment of one’s sexual orientation, as an element of privacy and dignity.

The chilling effect is due to the danger of a human being subjected to social

opprobrium or disapproval, as reflected in the punishment of crime. Hence the

Koushal rationale that prosecution of a few is not an index of violation is flawed and

cannot be accepted. Consequently, we disagree with the manner in which Koushal

has dealt with the privacy – dignity based claims of LGBT persons on this aspect.


Since the challenge to Section 377 is pending consideration before a larger Bench of

this Court, we would leave the constitutional validity to be decided in an appropriate

proceeding.

India’s commitment to a global human rights regime.Article 51of the Constitution,

which forms part of the Directive Principles, requires the State to endeavour to “foster

respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised

peoples with one another”221.Article 12of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,

recognises the right to privacy:

The duty of a State to respect mandates that it must not violate the right. The duty to

protect mandates that the government must protect it against interference by private

parties.   The duty to fulfil postulates that government must take steps towards

realisation of a right. While elaborating the rights underArticle 17, general comment

16 specifically stipulates that:

(i) U K decisions

   The first common law case regarding protection of privacy is said to be Semayne’s

   Case227 (1604). The case related to the entry into a property by the Sheriff of London

   in order to execute a valid writ. The case is famous for the words of Sir Edward Coke:

She sought damages under the English law through her lawyers to bring a claim for

breach of confidence engagingSection 6of the Human Rights Act. The House of

Lords by majority decided in her favour. Lord Hope writing for the majority held:

[2004] 2 AC 457.

135PART K


In holding so, Lord Hope relied upon the following statement of Lord Woolf inA v B

Inc237(2003):

The police, in order to identify those responsible, and for the sake of deterrence,

published CCTV footage depicting the Appellant in two newspapers. The issue

involved was: “Whether the publication of photographs by the police to identify a young

person suspected of being involved in riotous behaviour and attempted criminal damage

can ever be a necessary and proportionate interference with that person’sarticle 8rights?” The majority held thatArticle 8was not engaged, as there was no reasonable

expectation of privacy in the case. Lord Toulson (with whom Lord Hodge agreed), while

stating that the conduct of the police did not amount, prima facie, to an interference with

the appellant’s right to respect for his private life, held that:

As early as 1886, in Boyd v United States246, the question before the US Supreme

   Court was whether compulsory production of a person’s private papers to be used in

   evidence against him in a judicial proceeding, is an unreasonable search and seizure

   within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. Justice Bradley delivered the opinion

   of the Court and held as follows:

In Olmstead v United States249 (1928), the question before the Court was whether

the use of evidence of private telephone conversations, intercepted by means of

wiretapping amounted to a violation of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments. In a 5:4

decision, it was held that there was no violation of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments.

Chief Justice Taft wrote the majority judgment, holding that:

Prior to 1967 when determining the ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’ for purposes

of discussing Fourth Amendment violations, the analysis was focused on whether the

authority had trespassed on a private location. This ‘trespass doctrine’ was the

prevailing test until Katz, which extended the protection of the Fourth Amendment

from ‘places’ to ‘people’, affording individuals more privacy even in public. The

‘trespass doctrine’ applied in Olmstead v United States (supra) was held to be no

longer relevant.

Justice Stewart wrote the majority (7:1) opinion and held that:

This right of privacy, whether it be founded in the Fourteenth
                  Amendment's concept of personal liberty and restrictions
                  upon state action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court
                  determined, in the Ninth Amendment's reservation of rights to
                  the people, is broad enough to encompass a woman's decision
                  whether or not to terminate her pregnancy.” (emphasis supplied)




The right to privacy in bank records was analysed by the US Supreme Court in United

States v Miller256 (1976). In this case federal agents were investigating the defendant

for his involvement in a bootlegging conspiracy. The agents subpoenaed two banks

and received his bank records. As a result, he was indicted. The question was whether

an individual reasonably can expect that records kept incidental to his personal

banking transactions will be protected from uncontrolled government inspection. In a

6:3 opinion, the Supreme Court held that a bank depositor has no Fourth Amendment

interest in the records that his bank is required to keep in compliance with the Bank

Secrecy Act of 1970, and that Miller had no right to privacy in his bank records. Writing

for the majority, Justice Lewis F. Powell asserted that the “documents subpoenaed...

are not [Miller’s] ‘private papers’,” but instead, part of the bank’s business records. It

was held:

While the outer limits of this aspect of privacy have not been marked
                  by the Court, it is clear that among the decisions that an individual
                  may make without unjustified government interference are personal
                  decisions "relating to marriage...; procreation...; contraception...;
                  family relationships...; and childrearing and education...”




It was further held that:

525 US 83 (1998)155PART K


Court noting that “[t]he text of the Amendment suggests that its protections extend

only to people in “their” houses.” The case was distinguished from Minnesota v

Olson262 (1990), where the Supreme Court decided that an overnight guest in a house

had the sort of expectation of privacy that the Fourth Amendment protects. The Court

was of the view that while an overnight guest in a home may claim the protection of

the Fourth Amendment, one who is merely present with the consent of the

householder may not. The respondents, in this case, were not overnight guests, but

were present for a business transaction and were only in the home for a few hours.

The Court held:

Dickson J. wrote the opinion of the Court and observed that the Canadian Charter is

a “purposive document” whose purpose is to “guarantee and to protect, within the

limits of reason, the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms it enshrines” and to279Section 8of the Charter provides as follows: “Everyone has the right to be secure against unreasonable
search or seizure.”280Section 7of the Canadian Charter deals with life, liberty and security of person and states that: “Everyone has
the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance
with the principles of fundamental justice.”281In Lavigne v. Canada (Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages), [2002] 2 SCR 773, the Supreme
Court of Canada recognised the Privacy Act as having a "quasi-constitutional" status, as it is “closely linked to
the values and rights set out in the Constitution”. The Court also stated that the "The Privacy Act is a reminder
of the extent to which the protection of privacy is necessary to the preservation of a free and democratic society”.282

[1984] 2 SCR 145173PART K


constrain governmental action inconsistent with those rights and freedoms. The Court

held that sinceSection 8is an entrenched constitutional provision, it was “not

vulnerable to encroachment by legislative enactments in the same way as common

law protections.”


The Court held that the purpose ofSection 8is to protect an individual's reasonable

expectation of privacy but right to privacy must be balanced against the government’s

duty to enforce the law. It was further held that:

The decision in R v Spencer287 (2014) was related to informational privacy. In this

case, the appellant used an online software to download child pornography onto a

computer and shared it publicly. The police requested subscriber information

associated with an IP address from the appellant’s Internet Service Provider and on

the basis of it, searched the computer used by him. The Canadian Supreme Court

unanimously ruled that the request for an IP address infringed the Charter's guarantee

against unreasonable search and seizure. It was held that the appellant had a

reasonable expectation of privacy. In doing so, it assessed whether there is a

“reasonable expectation of privacy” in the “totality of the circumstances”, which

includes “the nature of the privacy interests implicated by the state action” and “factors

more directly concerned with the expectation of privacy, both subjectively and

objectively viewed, in relation to those interests”. It was further held:

Article 8of the ECHR provides that:

PART K

2. Such data must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on
                  the basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other
                  legitimate basis laid down by law. Everyone has the right of access to
                  data which has been collected concerning him or her, and the right to
                  have it rectified.

3. Compliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an
                  independent authority.

Article 52Scope of guaranteed rights

1. Any limitation on the exercise of the rights and freedoms recognised
                  by this Charter must be provided for by law and respect the essence of
                  those rights and freedoms. Subject to the principle of proportionality,
                  limitations may be made only if they are necessary and genuinely meet
                  objectives of general interests recognised by the Union of the need to
                  protect the rights and freedoms of others.

2. Rights recognised by this Charter which are based on the
                  Community Treaties or the Treaty on European Union shall be
                  exercised under the conditions and within the limits defined by those
                  Treaties.

3. In so far as this Charter contains rights which correspond to rights
                  guaranteed by the Convention of the Protection of Human Rights and
                  Fundamental Freedoms, the meaning and scope of those rights shall
                  be the same as those laid down by the said Convention. This provision
                  shall not prevent Union law providing more extensive protection.Article 52(3)provides for the ECHR as a minimum standard of human rights in the

EU.Article 52(3)thus leads the EU to be indirectly bound by the ECHR as it must

always be obeyed when restricting fundamental rights in the EU. Moreover, in the pre-

Charter era, the protection of privacy was held to form part of the right to privacy in

line with how the ECtHR in Strasbourg interpretsArt. 8of ECHR till date288.288In the case of J McB v LE, Case C-400/10 PPU, [2010] ECR I-nyr, the CJEU ruled that where Charter rights
paralleled ECHR rights, the Court of Justice should follow any consistent jurisprudence of the European Court of
Human Rights, elucidating that: “It is clear that the saidArticle 7 [of the EU Charter] contains rights corresponding
to those guaranteed byArticle 8(1)of the ECHR.Article 7of the Charter must therefore be given the same
meaning and the same scope asArticle 8(1)of the ECHR...” Reference can be passed to a case before ECtHR,182PART K


Thus, in order to understand the protection extended to the right to privacy in EU, the

jurisprudence ofArticle 8of the Convention andArticle 7of the Charter need to be

analyzed. The term ‘private life’ is an essential ingredient of both these provisions and

has been interpreted to encompass a wide range of interests.


In the case of Niemietz v Germany289 (1992), the ECtHR observed that:

This test is followed by the Court each time it appliesArticle 8in a
             given case.”


In other words, a fair balance is struck between the general interest of the community

and the interests of the individual.

The Grand Chamber of 18 judges at the ECtHR, in S and Marper v United Kingdom

(supra), examined the claim of the applicants that their Right to Respect for Private

Life underArticle 8was being violated as their fingerprints, cell samples and DNA

profiles were retained in a database after successful termination of criminal

proceedings against them. The Court held that there had been a violation ofArticle 8of the Convention. Finding that the retention at issue had constituted a

disproportionate interference with the applicants’ right to respect for private life, the

Court held that “the blanket and indiscriminate nature of the powers of retention of the

fingerprints, cellular samples and DNA profiles of persons...fails to strike a fair balance

between the competing public and private interests and that the respondent State has

overstepped any acceptable margin of appreciation”. It was further held that:

PART L

(iv)   privacy is a concept which does not have any specific meaning or definition

       and the expression is inchoate; and

(v)    the draftsmen of the Constitution specifically did not include such a right as

       part of the chapter on fundamental rights and even the ambit of the expression

       liberty which was originally sought to be used in the draft Constitution was

       pruned to personal liberty. These submissions have been buttressed by Mr

       Aryama Sundaram, learned senior counsel.

136    Criticism and critique lie at the core of democratic governance. Tolerance of

dissent is equally a cherished value. In deciding a case of such significant dimensions,

the Court must factor in the criticisms voiced both domestically and internationally.

These, as we notice, are based on academic, philosophical and practical

considerations.

137    The Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy adverts to “several sceptical and

critical accounts of privacy”. The criticism is set out thus:

138     In a 2013 article published in the Harvard Law Review, a professor of law at

Georgetown Law Center, Georgetown University, described privacy as having an

“image problem”302. Privacy, as she notes, has been cast as “old-fashioned at best

and downright harmful at worst - anti-progressive, overly costly, and inimical to the

welfare of the body politic”303. The consequences in her view are predictable:

139      Another criticism, which is by Robert Bork, questions the choice of

fundamental values of the Constitution by judges of the US Supreme Court and the

theory (propounded by Justice Douglas in Griswold) of the existence of ‘penumbras’

or zones of privacy created by the Bill of Rights as a leap of judicial interpretation.305




140     The Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy seeks to offer an understanding

of the literature on privacy in terms of two concepts: reductionism and coherentism.306

Reductionists are generally critical of privacy while the Coherentists defend

fundamental values of privacy interests. The criticisms of privacy have been broadly

summarised as consisting of the following :

a       Thomson’s Reductionism307


Judith Jarvis Thomson, in an article published in 1975, noted that while there is little

agreement on the content of privacy, ultimately privacy is a cluster of rights which

overlap with property rights or the right to bodily security. In her view, the right to

privacy is derivative in the sense that a privacy violation is better understood as

violation of a more basic right.

305For this criticism, see : Robert H Bork, “Neutral Principles and some First Amendment Problems”, Indiana
   Law Journal (Fall 1971), Vol. 47(1), at pages 8-9306Supra note 301307Judith Jarvis Thomson, “The Right to Privacy” , Philosophy and Public Affairs (1975), Vol. 4, at pages 295-

Richard Posner, in ‘the Economics of Justice’ published in 1981, argued that

privacy is protected in ways that are economically inefficient. In his view, privacy

should be protected only when access to information would reduce its value such as

when a student is allowed access to a letter of recommendation for admission,

rendering such a letter less reliable. According to Posner, privacy when manifested

as control over information about oneself, is utilised to mislead or manipulate others.

c         Bork’s critique


Robert Bork, in ‘The Tempting of America: The Political Seduction of the Law’309,

has been severe in his criticism of the protection of privacy by the US Supreme Court.

In his view, Justice Douglas in Griswold did not derive privacy from some pre-existing

right but sought to create a new right which has no foundation in the Bill of Rights,

thereby overstepping the bounds of a judge by making new law and not by interpreting

it.

Many theorists urge that the constitutional right to privacy is more correctly regarded

as a right to liberty.

The powerful counter argument to these criticisms is that while individuals possess

multiple liberties under the Constitution, read in isolation, many of them are not related

to the kinds of concerns that emerge in privacy issues. In this view, liberty is a concept308Richard Posner, The Economics of Justice, Harvard University Press (1981), as cited in Supra note 301309Robert Bork, The Tempting of America : The Political Seduction of the Law, Simon and Schuster (1990), as
    cited in Supra note 301197PART L


which is broader than privacy and issues or claims relating to privacy are a sub-set of

claims to liberty.310 Hence it has been argued that privacy protects liberty and that

“privacy protection gains for us the freedom to define ourselves and our relations to

others”311. This rationale understands the relationship between liberty and privacy by

stipulating that while liberty is a broader notion, privacy is essential for protecting

liberty. Recognizing a constitutional right to privacy is a reaffirmation of the individual

interest in making certain decisions crucial to one’s personality and being.

d       Feminist critique


Many writers on feminism express concern over the use of privacy as a veneer for

patriarchal domination and abuse of women. Patriarchal notions still prevail in several

societies including our own and are used as a shield to violate core constitutional

rights of women based on gender and autonomy. As a result, gender violence is often

treated as a matter of “family honour” resulting in the victim of violence suffering twice

over – the physical and mental trauma of her dignity being violated and the perception

that it has cause an affront to “honour”. Privacy must not be utilised as a cover to

conceal and assert patriarchal mindsets.

Catherine MacKinnon in a 1989 publication titled ‘Towards a Feminist Theory of

the State’312 adverts to the dangers of privacy when it is used to cover up physical

harm done to women by perpetrating their subjection. Yet, it must also be noticed310Supra note 301311Ibid312Catherine MacKinnon, Toward a Feminist Theory of the State, Harvard University Press (1989), as cited in
Supra note 301198PART L


 that women have an inviolable interest in privacy. Privacy is the ultimate guarantee

 against violations caused by programmes not unknown to history, such as state

 imposed sterilization programmes or mandatory state imposed drug testing for

 women. The challenge in this area is to enable the state to take the violation of the

 dignity of women in the domestic sphere seriously while at the same time protecting

 the privacy entitlements of women grounded in the identity of gender and liberty.



 141     The submission that privacy has no accepted or defined connotation can be

 analysed with reference to the evolution of the concept in the literature on the subject.

 Some of the leading approaches which should be considered for an insight into the

 ambit and content of privacy:

Bert-Jaap Koops et al., “A Typology of Privacy”, University of Pennsylvania Journal of International Law (2017),
    Vol. 38, Issue 2, at page 496199PART L


 hold some aspects of ourselves back from others, either as too personal and sacred

 or as too shameful and profane to express”315.

(ii)     Roger Clarke has developed a classification of privacy on Maslow’s pyramid

 of values316. The values described in Maslow’s pyramid are: self-actualization, self-

 esteem, love or belonging, safety and physiological or biological need. Clarke’s

 categories include (a) privacy of the person also known as bodily privacy. Bodily

 privacy is violated by compulsory extraction of samples of body fluids and body tissue

 and compulsory sterilization; (b) privacy of personal behaviour which is part of a

 private space including the home; (c) Privacy of personal communications which is

 expressed as the freedom of communication without interception or routine monitoring

 of one’s communication by others; (d) Privacy of personal data which is linked to the

 concept of informational privacy.

(iii)    Anita Allen has, in a 2011 publication, developed the concept of “unpopular

 privacy”317. According to her, governments must design “unpopular” privacy laws and

 duties to protect the common good, even if privacy is being forced on individuals who

 may not want it. Individuals under this approach are not permitted to waive their

 privacy rights. Among the component elements which she notices are : (a) physical

 or spatial privacy – illustrated by the privacy in the home; (b) informational privacy

 including information data or facts about persons or their communications; (c)315Ibid, at page 497316Ibid, at 498317Ibid, at 500200PART L


 decisional privacy which protects the right of citizens to make intimate choices about

 their rights from intrusion by the State; (d) proprietary privacy which relates to the

 protection of one’s reputation; (e) associational privacy which protects the right of

 groups with certain defined characteristics to determine whom they may include or

 exclude.318


 Privacy has distinct connotations including (i) spatial control; (ii) decisional autonomy;

 and (iii) informational control.319 Spatial control denotes the creation of private spaces.

 Decisional autonomy comprehends intimate personal choices such as those

 governing reproduction as well as choices expressed in public such as faith or modes

 of dress. Informational control empowers the individual to use privacy as a shield to

 retain personal control over information pertaining to the person. With regard to

 informational privacy, it has been stated that :

PART M


144     On 17 March 1947, K M Munshi submitted Draft articles on the fundamental

rights and duties of citizens to the Sub-committee on fundamental rights. Among the

rights of freedom proposed in clause 5 were the following322 :

145     On 24 March 1947, Dr Ambedkar submitted a Memorandum and Draft articles

on the rights of states and minorities. Among the draft articles on fundamental rights

of citizens was the following323 :

146     The draft report of the Sub-committee submitted on 3 April 1947 contained a

division between the fundamental rights into justiciable and non-justiciable rights.

Clause 9(d) and Clause 10 provided as follows324 :

147        Dr B N Rau in his notes on the draft report had reservations about clause 10

which were expressed thus325:

148   This discussion would indicate that there was a debate during the course of the

drafting of the Constitution on the proposal to guarantee to every citizen the right to

secrecy of correspondence in clause 9(d) and the protection to be secure against

unreasonable searches and seizures in their persons houses, papers and assets. The

objection to clause 9(d) was set out in the note of dissent of Sir Alladi Krishnaswamy

Iyer and it was his view that the guarantee of secrecy of correspondence may lead to

every private correspondence becoming a state paper. There was also a feeling that

this would affect the prosecution especially in cases of conspiracy or abetment.

Similarly, his objection to clause 10 was that it would abrogate some of the provisions

of theCode of Criminal Procedure. B N Rau likewise stated that this would seriously

affect the powers of investigation of the police. The clause protecting the secrecy of

correspondence was thus dropped on the ground that it would constitute a serious

impediment in prosecutions while the protection against unreasonable searches and

seizures was deleted on the ground that there were provisions in theCode of Criminal

Procedure, 1898 covering the area. The debates of the Constituent Assembly indicate207PART M


that the proposed inclusion (which was eventually dropped) was in two specific areas

namely correspondence and searches and seizures. From this, it cannot be concluded

that the Constituent Assembly had expressly resolved to reject the notion of the right

to privacy as an integral element of the liberty and freedoms guaranteed by the

fundamental rights.

149   The Constitution has evolved over time, as judicial interpretation, led to the

recognition of specific interests and entitlements. These have been subsumed within

the freedoms and liberties guaranteed by the Constitution.Article 21has been

interpreted by this Court to mean that life does not mean merely a physical existence.

It includes all those faculties by which life is enjoyed. The ambit of ‘the procedure

established by law’ has been interpreted to mean that the procedure must be fair, just

and reasonable. The coalescence ofArticles 14, 19and21has brought into being a

jurisprudence which recognises the inter-relationship between rights. That is how the

requirements of fairness and non-discrimination animate both the substantive and

procedural aspects ofArticle 21.These constitutional developments have taken place

as the words of the Constitution have been interpreted to deal with new exigencies

requiring an expansive reading of liberties and freedoms to preserve human rights

under the rule of law. India’s brush with a regime of the suspension of life and personal

liberty in the not too distant past is a grim reminder of how tenuous liberty can be, if

the judiciary is not vigilant. The interpretation of the Constitution cannot be frozen by

its original understanding. The Constitution has evolved and must continuously evolve208PART M


to meet the aspirations and challenges of the present and the future. Nor can judges

foresee every challenge and contingency which may arise in the future. This is

particularly of relevance in an age where technology reshapes our fundamental

understanding of information, knowledge and human relationships that was unknown

even in the recent past. Hence as Judges interpreting the Constitution today, the

Court must leave open the path for succeeding generations to meet the challenges to

privacy that may be unknown today.

150   The impact of the decision in Cooper is to establish a link between the

fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. The immediate

consequence of the decision is that a law which restricts the personal liberties

contained inArticle 19must meet the test of permissible restrictions contemplated by

Clauses 2 to 6 in relation to the fundamental freedom which is infringed. Moreover,

since the fundamental rights are inter-related,Article 21is no longer to be construed

as a residue of rights which are not specifically enumerated inArticle 19.Both sets

of rights overlap and hence a law which affects one of the personal freedoms underArticle 19would, in addition to the requirement of meeting the permissible restrictions

contemplated in clauses 2 to 6, have to meet the parameters of a valid ‘procedure

established by law’ underArticle 21where it impacts on life or personal liberty. The

law would be assessed not with reference to its object but on the basis of its effect

and impact on the fundamental rights. Coupled with the breakdown of the theory that

the fundamental rights are water-tight compartments, the post Maneka jurisprudence

infused the test of fairness and reasonableness in determining whether the ‘procedure209PART M


established by law’ passes muster underArticle 21.At a substantive level, the

constitutional values underlying each article in the Chapter on fundamental rights

animate the meaning of the others. This development of the law has followed a natural

evolution. The basis of this development after all is that every aspect of the diverse

guarantees of fundamental rights deals with human beings. Every element together

with others contributes in the composition of the human personality. In the very nature

of things, no element can be read in a manner disjunctive from the composite whole.

The close relationship between each of the fundamental rights has led to the

recognition of constitutional entitlements and interests. Some of them may straddle

more than one, and on occasion several, fundamental rights. Yet others may reflect

the core value upon which the fundamental rights are founded. Even at the birth of

the Constitution, the founding fathers recognised in the Constituent Assembly that, for

instance, the freedom of speech and expression would comprehend the freedom of

the press. Hence the guarantee of free speech and expression has been interpreted

to extend to the freedom of the press. Recognition of the freedom of the press does

not create by judicial fiat, a new fundamental right but is an acknowledgment of that,

which lies embedded and without which the guarantee of free speech and expression

would not be complete.       Similarly,Article 21has been interpreted to include a

spectrum of entitlements such as a right to a clean environment, the right to public

health, the right to know, the right to means of communication and the right to

education, besides a panoply of rights in the context of criminal law and procedure in

matters such as handcuffing and speedy trial. The rights which have been held to flow

out ofArticle 21include the following:

Neither is this an exercise in constitutional amendment brought about by judicial

decision nor does it result in the creation of a new set of fundamental rights. The

exercise has been one of interpreting existing rights guaranteed by the Constitution

and while understanding the core of those rights, to define the ambit of what the right

comprehends.

151      The draftsmen of the Constitution had a sense of history both global and

domestic– as they attempted to translate their vision of freedom into guarantees

against authoritarian behaviour. The Constitution adopted a democratic form of

government based on the rule of law. The framers were conscious of the widespread

abuse of human rights by authoritarian regimes in the two World Wars separated over

a period of two decades. The framers were equally conscious of the injustice suffered

under a colonial regime and more recently of the horrors of partition. The backdrop

of human suffering furnished a reason to preserve a regime of governance based on

the rule of law which would be subject to democratic accountability against a violation

of fundamental freedoms. The content of the fundamental rights evolved over the340(1978) 4 SCC 494341(2013) 10 SCC 591342(1985) 3 SCC 545212PART M


course of our constitutional history and any discussion of the issues of privacy,

together with its relationship with liberty and dignity, would be incomplete without a

brief reference to the course of history as it unravels in precedent. By guaranteeing

the freedoms and liberties embodied in the fundamental rights, the Constitution has

preserved natural rights and ring-fenced them from attempts to attenuate their

existence.

Technology, as we experience it today is far different from what it was in the lives of

the generation which drafted the Constitution. Information technology together with

the internet and the social media and all their attendant applications have rapidly

altered the course of life in the last decade. Today’s technology renders models of

application of a few years ago obsolescent. Hence, it would be an injustice both to the

draftsmen of the Constitution as well as to the document which they sanctified to

constrict its interpretation to an originalist interpretation. Today’s problems have to be

adjudged by a vibrant application of constitutional doctrine and cannot be frozen by a

vision suited to a radically different society. We describe the Constitution as a living

instrument simply for the reason that while it is a document which enunciates eternal

values for Indian society, it possesses the resilience necessary to ensure its continued

relevance. Its continued relevance lies precisely in its ability to allow succeeding

generations to apply the principles on which it has been founded to find innovative

solutions to intractable problems of their times.       In doing so, we must equally

understand that our solutions must continuously undergo a process of re-engineering.213PART N


N     Is the statutory protection to privacy reason to deny a constitutional right?


152     The Union government and some of the States which have supported it have

urged this Court that there is a statutory regime by virtue of which the right to privacy

is adequately protected and hence it is not necessary to read a constitutional right to

privacy into the fundamental rights. This submission is sought to be fortified by

contending that privacy is merely a common law right and the statutory protection is

a reflection of that position.

153     The submission betrays lack of understanding of the reason why rights are

protected in the first place as entrenched guarantees in a Bill of Rights or, as in the

case of the Indian Constitution, as part of the fundamental rights. Elevating a right to

the position of a constitutionally protected right places it beyond the pale of legislative

majorities. When a constitutional right such as the right to equality or the right to life

assumes the character of being a part of the basic structure of the Constitution, it

assumes inviolable status: inviolability even in the face of the power of amendment.

Ordinary legislation is not beyond the pale of legislative modification. A statutory right

can be modified, curtailed or annulled by a simple enactment of the legislature. In

other words, statutory rights are subject to the compulsion of legislative majorities.

The purpose of infusing a right with a constitutional element is precisely to provide it

a sense of immunity from popular opinion and, as its reflection, from legislative

annulment. Constitutionally protected rights embody the liberal belief that personal

liberties of the individual are so sacrosanct that it is necessary to ensconce them in a214PART O


protective shell that places them beyond the pale of ordinary legislation. To negate a

constitutional right on the ground that there is an available statutory protection is to

invert constitutional theory. As a matter of fact, legislative protection is in many cases,

an acknowledgment and recognition of a constitutional right which needs to be

effectuated and enforced through protective laws.


For instance, the provisions ofSection 8(1)(j)of the Right to Information Act, 2005

which contain an exemption from the disclosure of information refer to such

information which would cause an unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the

individual.

But the important point to note is that when a right is conferred with an entrenched

constitutional status in Part III, it provides a touchstone on which the validity of

executive decision making can be assessed and the validity of law can be determined

by judicial review. Entrenched constitutional rights provide the basis of evaluating the

validity of law. Hence, it would be plainly unacceptable to urge that the existence of

law negates the rationale for a constitutional right or renders the constitutional right

unnecessary.

forsaken in the interest of welfare entitlements provided by the State. In our view, the

submission that the right to privacy is an elitist construct which stands apart from the215PART O


needs and aspirations of the large majority constituting the rest of society, is

unsustainable. This submission betrays a misunderstanding of the constitutional

position. Our Constitution places the individual at the forefront of its focus,

guaranteeing civil and political rights in Part III and embodying an aspiration for

achieving socio- economic rights in Part IV. The refrain that the poor need no civil

and political rights and are concerned only with economic well-being has been utilised

though history to wreak the most egregious violations of human rights. Above all, it

must be realised that it is the right to question, the right to scrutinize and the right to

dissent which enables an informed citizenry to scrutinize the actions of government.

Those who are governed are entitled to question those who govern, about the

discharge of their constitutional duties including in the provision of socio-economic

welfare benefits. The power to scrutinize and to reason enables the citizens of a

democratic polity to make informed decisions on basic issues which govern their

rights. The theory that civil and political rights are subservient to socio-economic rights

has been urged in the past and has been categorically rejected in the course of

constitutional adjudication by this Court.

155    Civil and political rights and socio-economic rights do not exist in a state of

antagonism. The conditions necessary for realising or fulfilling socio-economic rights

do not postulate the subversion of political freedom. The reason for this is simple.

Socio-economic entitlements must yield true benefits to those for whom they are

intended. This can be achieved by eliminating rent-seeking behaviour and by216PART O


preventing the capture of social welfare benefits by persons who are not entitled to

them. Capture of social welfare benefits can be obviated only when political systems

are transparent and when there is a free flow of information. Opacity enures to the

benefit of those who monopolize scarce economic resources. On the other hand,

conditions where civil and political freedoms flourish ensure that governmental

policies are subjected to critique and assessment. It is this scrutiny which sub-serves

the purpose of ensuring that socio-economic benefits actually permeate to the under-

privileged for whom they are meant. Conditions of freedom and a vibrant assertion of

civil and political rights promote a constant review of the justness of socio-economic

programmes and of their effectiveness in addressing deprivation and want. Scrutiny

of public affairs is founded upon the existence of freedom. Hence civil and political

rights and socio-economic rights are complementary and not mutually exclusive.




156        Some of these themes have been addressed in the writings of the Nobel

laureate, Amartya Sen. Sen compares the response of many non-democratic regimes

in critical situations such as famine with the responses of democratic societies in

similar situations.343 His analysis reveals that the political immunity enjoyed by

government leaders in authoritarian states prevents effective measures being taken

to address such conditions:

157   We need also emphasise the lack of substance in the submission that privacy

is a privilege for the few. Every individual in society irrespective of social class or

economic status is entitled to the intimacy and autonomy which privacy protects. It is

privacy as an intrinsic and core feature of life and personal liberty which enables an

individual to stand up against a programme of forced sterilization. Then again, it is

privacy which is a powerful guarantee if the State were to introduce compulsory drug

trials of non-consenting men or women. The sanctity of marriage, the liberty of

procreation, the choice of a family life and the dignity of being are matters which

concern every individual irrespective of social strata or economic well being. The

pursuit of happiness is founded upon autonomy and dignity. Both are essential

attributes of privacy which makes no distinction between the birth marks of individuals.

P     Not just a common law right


158   There is also no merit in the defence of the Union and the States that privacy

is merely a common law right. The fact that a right may have been afforded protection

at common law does not constitute a bar to the constitutional recognition of the right.221PART P


The Constitution recognises the right simply because it is an incident of a fundamental

freedom or liberty which the draftsperson considered to be so significant as to require

constitutional protection. Once privacy is held to be an incident of the protection of

life, personal liberty and of the liberties guaranteed by the provisions of Part III of the

Constitution, the submission that privacy is only a right at common law misses the

wood for the trees. The central theme is that privacy is an intrinsic part of life, personal

liberty and of the freedoms guaranteed by Part III which entitles it to protection as a

core of constitutional doctrine. The protection of privacy by the Constitution liberates

it, as it were, from the uncertainties of statutory law which, as we have noted, is subject

to the range of legislative annulments open to a majoritarian government.                         Any

abridgment must meet the requirements prescribed byArticle 21,Article 19or the

relevant freedom. The Constitutional right is placed at a pedestal which embodies

both a negative and a positive freedom. The negative freedom protects the individual

from unwanted intrusion. As a positive freedom, it obliges the State to adopt suitable

measures for protecting individual privacy. An apt description of this facet is contained

in the Max Planck Encyclopaedia of Comparative Constitutional Law, in its

section on the right to privacy352 :

159    During the course of the hearing, Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel

appearing on behalf of the State of Gujarat submitted that the requirement of a valid

law with reference toArticle 21is not conditioned by the notion of substantive due

process. Substantive due process, it was urged is a concept which has been evolved

in relation to the US Constitution but is inapposite in relation to the Indian Constitution.


The history surrounding the drafting ofArticle 21indicates a conscious decision by

the Constituent Assembly not to introduce the expression “due process of law” which

is incorporated in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the US Constitution. The

draft Constitution which was prepared by the Drafting Committee chaired by Dr B R

Ambedkar contained a ‘due process’ clause to the effect that ‘nor any State shall

deprive any person of life, liberty and property without due process of law’. The clause

as originally drafted was subjected to three important changes in the Constituent

Assembly. Firstly, the reference to property was deleted from the above clause of the

draft Constitution. The members of the Constituent Assembly perceived that retaining

the right to property as part of the due process clause would pose a serious

impediment to legislative reform particularly with the redistribution of property. The

second important change arose from a meeting which Shri B N Rau had with Justice223PART Q


 Felix Frankfurter in the US. In the US particularly in the years around the Great

 Depression, American Courts had utilised the due process clause to invalidate social

 welfare legislation. In the Lochner353 era, the US Supreme Court invalidated

 legislation such as statutes prohibiting employers from making their employees work

 for more than ten hours a day or sixty hours a week on the supposition that this

 infringed the liberty of contract. Between 1899 and 1937 (excluding the civil rights

 cases), 159 US Supreme Court decisions held state statutes unconstitutional under

 the due process and equal protection clauses. Moreover, 25 other statutes were

 struck down under the due process clause together with other provisions of the

 American Constitution.354 Under the due process clause, the US Supreme Court

 struck down labour legislation prohibiting employers from discriminating on the

 grounds of union activity; regulation of wages; regulation of prices for commodities

 and services; and legislation denying entry into business. 355 These decisions were

 eventually distinguished or overruled in 1937 and thereafter.356




 160     The Constituent Assembly, in this background, made a second important

 change in the original draft by qualifying the expression ‘liberty’ with the word

 ‘personal’. Shri B N Rau suggested that if this qualification were not to be introduced,353Lochner v New York, 198 US 45 (1905)354William B Lockhart, et al, Constitutional Law: Cases- Comments-Questions, West Publishing Co. (1986), 6th
 edition, at page 394355Adair v United States, 208 US 161, 28 S. Ct. 277, 52 L.Ed. 436 (1908) (fifth amendment);
    Adkins v Children’s Hosp. 261 US 525, 43 S.Ct. 22, 70 L.Ed (1923) (fifth amendment);
    Tyson & Bro. v. Banton, 273 US 418, 47 S.Ct. 426, 71 L.Ed. 718 (1927); and
    New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 US 262, 52 S Ct. 371, 76 L.Ed. 747 (1932)356NLRB v Jones & Laughlin Stell Corp. (1937);

West Coast Hotel Co. v Parrish, 300 US 379, 57 S. Ct. 578, 81 L.Ed. 703 (1937)224PART Q


  even price control legislation would be interpreted as interfering with the opportunity

  of contract between seller and buyer (see in this context B Shiva Rao’s ‘The Framing

  of India’s Constitution: A Study’ 357).

161      The third major change which the Constituent Assembly made was that the

  phrase ‘due process of law’ was deleted from the text of the draft Constitution.

  Following B N Rau’s meeting with Justice Frankfurter, the Drafting Committee deleted

  the phrase ‘due process of law’ and replaced it with ‘procedure established by law’.

  Granville Austin refers to the interaction between Frankfurter and B N Rau and the

  reason for the deletion358 :

162   In Gopalan, the Preventive Detention Act, 1950 was challenged on the ground

that it denied significant procedural safeguards against arbitrary detention. The

majority rejected the argument that the expression ‘procedure established by law’

meant procedural due process. Chief Justice Kania noted thatArticle 21of our

Constitution had consciously been drawn up by the draftsmen so as to not use the

word ‘due process’ which was used in the American Constitution. Hence it was

impermissible to read the expression ‘procedure established by law’ to mean

‘procedural due process’ or as requiring compliance with natural justice. Justice

Patanjali Sastri held that reading the expression ‘due process of law’ into the

Constitution was impermissible since it would lead to those ‘subtle and elusive criteria’228PART Q


implied in the phrase which it was the deliberate purpose of the framers of our

Constitution to avoid. Similarly, Justice Das also observed that our Constitution

makers had deliberately declined to adopt “the uncertain and shifting American

doctrine of due process of law” which could not, therefore, be read intoArticle 21.Hence, the view of the majority was that once the procedure was established by a

validly enacted law,Article 21would not be violated.



163    In his celebrated dissent, Justice Fazl Ali pointed out that the phrase ‘procedure

established by law’ was borrowed from the Japanese Constitution (which was drafted

under American influence at the end of the Second World War) and hence the

expression means ‘procedural due process’. In Justice Fazl Ali’s view the deprivation

of life and personal liberty underArticle 21, had to be preceded by (i) a notice; (ii) an

opportunity of being heard; (iii) adjudication by an impartial tribunal; and (iv) an orderly

course of procedure. Formulating these four principles, Justice Fazl Ali held thus:

164      A substantive challenge to the constitutional validity of the death penalty on a

conviction on a charge of murder was raised in Bachan Singh371. The judgment

noted:

Yet the debates in the Constituent Assembly indicate that there was a substantial

body of opposition to the deletion of the due process clause, which eventually led Dr

B R Ambedkar to objectively sum up the rival view points for decision by the House.

Evidently ‘due process’ was substituted with the expression ‘procedure established by

law’. ‘Liberty’ was qualified by ‘personal’.

383

Ibid, at page 481 (para 64)237PART Q


Having noticed this, the evolution ofArticle 21, since the decision in Cooper indicates

two major areas of change. First, the fundamental rights are no longer regarded as

isolated silos or water tight compartments. In consequence,Article 14has been held

to animate the content ofArticle 21.Second, the expression ‘procedure established

by law’ inArticle 21does not connote a formalistic requirement of a mere presence of

procedure in enacted law. That expression has been held to signify the content of the

procedure and its quality which must be fair, just and reasonable. The mere fact that

the law provides for the deprivation of life or personal liberty is not sufficient to

conclude its validity and the procedure to be constitutionally valid must be fair, just

and reasonable. The quality of reasonableness does not attach only to the content of

the procedure which the law prescribes with reference toArticle 21but to the content

of the law itself. In other words, the requirement ofArticle 21is not fulfilled only by the

enactment of fair and reasonable procedure under the law and a law which does so

may yet be susceptible to challenge on the ground that its content does not accord

with the requirements of a valid law. The law is open to substantive challenge on the

ground that it violates the fundamental right.

In dealing with a substantive challenge to a law on the ground that it violates a

fundamental right, there are settled principles of constitutional interpretation which

hold the field. The first is the presumption of constitutionality384 which is based on the384Charanjit Lal Chowdhury v. The Union of India, AIR 1951 SC 41 ;Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Shri Justice S.R.
Tendolkar, AIR 1958 SC 538 ;Burrakur Coal Co. Ltd. v. Union of IndiaAIR 1961 SC 954 ;Pathumma v. State
of Kerala(1970) 2 SCR 537 ;R.K. Garg v. Union of India, (1981) 4 SCC 675 ;State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery
Limited, AIR 1997 SC 1511 ;State of Andhra Pradesh v. K. Purushottam Reddy(2003) 9 SCC 564, ;Mardia
Chemicals Ltd. v. Union of India, (2004) 4 SCC 311 ;State of Gujarat v. Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat,238PART Qfoundational principle that the legislature which is entrusted with the duty of law

making best understands the needs of society and would not readily be assumed to

have transgressed a constitutional limitation. The burden lies on the individual who

asserts a constitutional transgression to establish it. Secondly, the Courts tread warily

in matters of social and economic policy where they singularly lack expertise to make

evaluations. Policy making is entrusted to the state.385



The doctrine of separation of powers requires the Court to allow deference to the

legislature whose duty it is to frame and enact law and to the executive whose duty it

is to enforce law. The Court would not, in the exercise of judicial review, substitute its

own opinion for the wisdom of the law enacting or law enforcing bodies.In the context

ofArticle 19, the test of reasonableness was explained in the erudite words of Chief

Justice Patanjali Sastri inState of Madras v V G Row386, where the learned Chief

Justice held thus:

165        The Court, in the exercise of its power of judicial review, is unquestionably

vested with the constitutional power to adjudicate upon the validity of a law. When

the validity of a law is questioned on the ground that it violates a guarantee contained

inArticle 21, the scope of the challenge is not confined only to whether the procedure

for the deprivation of life or personal liberty is fair, just and reasonable. Substantive

challenges to the validity of laws encroaching upon the right to life or personal liberty

has been considered and dealt with in varying contexts, such as the death penalty

(Bachan Singh) and mandatory death sentence (Mithu), among other cases. A

person cannot be deprived of life or personal liberty except in accordance with the

procedure established by law.Article 14, as a guarantee against arbitrariness, infuses

the entirety ofArticle 21.The inter-relationship between the guarantee against

arbitrariness and the protection of life and personal liberty operates in a multi-faceted

plane. First, it ensures that the procedure for deprivation must be fair, just and

reasonable. Second,Article 14impacts both the procedure and the expression “law”.387

Ibid, at page 607240PART Q


A law within the meaning ofArticle 21must be consistent with the norms of fairness

which originate inArticle 14.As a matter of principle, onceArticle 14has a connect

withArticle 21, norms of fairness and reasonableness would apply not only to the

procedure but to the law as well.

166    Above all, it must be recognized that judicial review is a powerful guarantee

against legislative encroachments on life and personal liberty. To cede this right would

dilute the importance of the protection granted to life and personal liberty by the

Constitution. Hence, while judicial review in constitutional challenges to the validity of

legislation is exercised with a conscious regard for the presumption of constitutionality

and for the separation of powers between the legislative, executive and judicial

institutions, the constitutional power which is vested in the Court must be retained as

a vibrant means of protecting the lives and freedoms of individuals.


167    The danger of construing this as an exercise of ‘substantive due process’ is that

it results in the incorporation of a concept from the American Constitution which was

consciously not accepted when the Constitution was framed. Moreover, even in the

country of its origin, substantive due process has led to vagaries of judicial

interpretation. Particularly having regard to the constitutional history surrounding the

deletion of that phrase in our Constitution, it would be inappropriate to equate the

jurisdiction of a Constitutional Court in India to entertain a substantive challenge to the

validity of a law with the exercise of substantive due process under the US

Constitution. Reference to substantive due process in some of          the judgments is241PART R


essentially a reference to a substantive challenge to the validity of a law on the ground

that its substantive (as distinct from procedural) provisions violate the Constitution.

R     Essential nature of privacy


168   What, then, does privacy postulate? Privacy postulates the reservation of a

private space for the individual, described as the right to be let alone. The concept is

founded on the autonomy of the individual. The ability of an individual to make choices

lies at the core of the human personality. The notion of privacy enables the individual

to assert and control the human element which is inseparable from the personality of

the individual. The inviolable nature of the human personality is manifested in the

ability to make decisions on matters intimate to human life. The autonomy of the

individual is associated over matters which can be kept private. These are concerns

over which there is a legitimate expectation of privacy. The body and the mind are

inseparable elements of the human personality. The integrity of the body and the

sanctity of the mind can exist on the foundation that each individual possesses an

inalienable ability and right to preserve a private space in which the human personality

can develop. Without the ability to make choices, the inviolability of the personality

would be in doubt. Recognizing a zone of privacy is but an acknowledgment that each

individual must be entitled to chart and pursue the course of development of

personality. Hence privacy is a postulate of human dignity itself. Thoughts and

behavioural patterns which are intimate to an individual are entitled to a zone of

privacy where one is free of social expectations. In that zone of privacy, an individual242PART R


is not judged by others. Privacy enables each individual to take crucial decisions which

find expression in the human personality. It enables individuals to preserve their

beliefs, thoughts, expressions, ideas, ideologies, preferences and choices against

societal demands of homogeneity. Privacy is an intrinsic recognition of heterogeneity,

of the right of the individual to be different and to stand against the tide of conformity

in creating a zone of solitude. Privacy protects the individual from the searching glare

of publicity in matters which are personal to his or her life. Privacy attaches to the

person and not to the place where it is associated. Privacy constitutes the foundation

of all liberty because it is in privacy that the individual can decide how liberty is best

exercised. Individual dignity and privacy are inextricably linked in a pattern woven out

of a thread of diversity into the fabric of a plural culture.



169    Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity. Dignity has both an

intrinsic and instrumental value. As an intrinsic value, human dignity is an entitlement

or a constitutionally protected interest in itself. In its instrumental facet, dignity and

freedom are inseparably inter-twined, each being a facilitative tool to achieve the

other. The ability of the individual to protect a zone of privacy enables the realization

of the full value of life and liberty. Liberty has a broader meaning of which privacy is

a subset. All liberties may not be exercised in privacy. Yet others can be fulfilled only

within a private space. Privacy enables the individual to retain the autonomy of the

body and mind. The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on

vital matters of concern to life. Privacy has not been couched as an independent

fundamental right. But that does not detract from the constitutional protection afforded243PART R


to it, once the true nature of privacy and its relationship with those fundamental rights

which are expressly protected is understood. Privacy lies across the spectrum of

protected freedoms. The guarantee of equality is a guarantee against arbitrary state

action. It prevents the state from discriminating between individuals. The destruction

by the state of a sanctified personal space whether of the body or of the mind is

violative of the guarantee against arbitrary state action. Privacy of the body entitles

an individual to the integrity of the physical aspects of personhood. The intersection

between one’s mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to freedom of

thought, the freedom to believe in what is right, and the freedom of self-determination.

When these guarantees intersect with gender, they create a private space which

protects all those elements which are crucial to gender identity. The family, marriage,

procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the individual.

Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable right to determine how

freedom shall be exercised.      An individual may perceive that the best form of

expression is to remain silent. Silence postulates a realm of privacy. An artist finds

reflection of the soul in a creative endeavour. A writer expresses the outcome of a

process of thought. A musician contemplates upon notes which musically lead to

silence. The silence, which lies within, reflects on the ability to choose how to convey

thoughts and ideas or interact with others. These are crucial aspects of personhood.

The freedoms underArticle 19can be fulfilled where the individual is entitled to decide

upon his or her preferences. Read in conjunction withArticle 21, liberty enables the

individual to have a choice of preferences on various facets of life including what and

how one will eat, the way one will dress, the faith one will espouse and a myriad other244PART R


matters on which autonomy and self-determination require a choice to be made within

the privacy of the mind. The constitutional right to the freedom of religion underArticle

25has implicit within it the ability to choose a faith and the freedom to express or not

express those choices to the world. These are some illustrations of the manner in

which privacy facilitates freedom and is intrinsic to the exercise of liberty.          The

Constitution does not contain a separate article telling us that privacy has been

declared to be a fundamental right. Nor have we tagged the provisions of Part III with

an alpha suffixed right of privacy: this is not an act of judicial redrafting. Dignity cannot

exist without privacy. Both reside within the inalienable values of life, liberty and

freedom which the Constitution has recognised. Privacy is the ultimate expression of

the sanctity of the individual. It is a constitutional value which straddles across the

spectrum of fundamental rights and protects for the individual a zone of choice and

self-determination.

Privacy represents the core of the human personality and recognizes the ability of

each individual to make choices and to take decisions governing matters intimate and

personal. Yet, it is necessary to acknowledge that individuals live in communities and

work in communities. Their personalities affect and, in turn are shaped by their social

environment. The individual is not a hermit. The lives of individuals are as much a

social phenomenon. In their interactions with others, individuals are constantly

engaged in behavioural patterns and in relationships impacting on the rest of society.

Equally, the life of the individual is being consistently shaped by cultural and social

values imbibed from living in the community. This state of flux which represents a245PART S


constant evolution of individual personhood in the relationship with the rest of society

provides the rationale for reserving to the individual a zone of repose. The lives which

individuals lead as members of society engender a reasonable expectation of privacy.

The notion of a reasonable expectation of privacy has elements both of a subjective

and objective nature. Privacy at a subjective level is a reflection of those areas where

an individual desire to be left alone. On an objective plane, privacy is defined by those

constitutional values which shape the content of the protected zone where the

individual ought to be left alone. The notion that there must exist a reasonable

expectation of privacy ensures that while on the one hand, the individual has a

protected zone of privacy, yet on the other, the exercise of individual choices is subject

to the rights of others to lead orderly lives. For instance, an individual who possesses

a plot of land may decide to build upon it subject to zoning regulations. If the building

bye laws define the area upon which construction can be raised or the height of the

boundary wall around the property, the right to privacy of the individual is conditioned

by regulations designed to protect the interests of the community in planned spaces.

Hence while the individual is entitled to a zone of privacy, its extent is based not only

on the subjective expectation of the individual but on an objective principle which

defines a reasonable expectation.

S     Informational privacy


170   Ours is an age of information. Information is knowledge. The old adage that

“knowledge is power” has stark implications for the position of the individual where246PART S


 data is ubiquitous, an all-encompassing presence. Technology has made life

 fundamentally interconnected. The internet has become all pervasive as individuals

 spend more and more time online each day of their lives. Individuals connect with

 others and use the internet as a means of communication. The internet is used to

 carry on business and to buy goods and services. Individuals browse the web in

 search of information, to send e-mails, use instant messaging services and to

 download movies. Online purchases have become an efficient substitute for the daily

 visit to the neighbouring store. Online banking has redefined relationships between

 bankers and customers. Online trading has created a new platform for the market in

 securities. Online music has refashioned the radio. Online books have opened up a

 new universe for the bibliophile. The old-fashioned travel agent has been rendered

 redundant by web portals which provide everything from restaurants to rest houses,

 airline tickets to art galleries, museum tickets to music shows. These are but a few of

 the reasons people access the internet each day of their lives. Yet every transaction

 of an individual user and every site that she visits, leaves electronic tracks generally

 without her knowledge.                These electronic tracks contain powerful means of

 information which provide knowledge of the sort of person that the user is and her

 interests388.        Individually, these information silos may seem inconsequential. In

 aggregation, they disclose the nature of the personality: food habits, language, health,

 hobbies, sexual preferences, friendships, ways of dress and political affiliation. In388See Francois Nawrot, Katarzyna Syska and Przemyslaw Switalski, “Horizontal application of fundamental
      rights – Right to privacy on the internet”, 9th Annual European Constitutionalism Seminar (May 2010),
      University of Warsaw, available at http://en.zpc.wpia.uw.edu.pl/wp-
      content/uploads/2010/04/9_Horizontal_Application_of_Fundamental_Rights.pdf247PART S


aggregation, information provides a picture of the being: of things which matter and

those that don’t, of things to be disclosed and those best hidden.



171        Popular websites install cookie files by the user’s browser. Cookies can tag

browsers for unique identified numbers, which allow them to recognise rapid users

and secure information about online behaviour. Information, especially the browsing

history of a user is utilised to create user profiles. The use of algorithms allows the

creation of profiles about internet users. Automated content analysis of e-mails allows

for reading of user e-mails. An e-mail can be analysed to deduce user interests and

to target suitable advertisements to a user on the site of the window. The books which

an individual purchases on-line provide footprints for targeted advertising of the same

genre. Whether an airline ticket has been purchased on economy or business class,

provides vital information about employment profile or spending capacity. Taxi rides

booked on-line to shopping malls provide a profile of customer preferences. A woman

who purchases pregnancy related medicines on-line would be in line to receive

advertisements for baby products. Lives are open to electronic scrutiny. To put it

mildly, privacy concerns are seriously an issue in the age of information.



172        A Press Note released by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India on 3 July,

2017389 is indicative of the prevalence of telecom services in India as on 31 December,

2016. The total number of subscribers stood at 1151.78 million, reflecting a 11.13389Press Release 45/2017, available at http://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/PR_No.45of2017.pdf248PART S


percent change over the previous year. There were 683.14 million urban subscribers

and 468.64 million rural subscribers. The total number of internet subscribers stood

at 391.50 million reflecting an 18.04 per cent change over the previous quarter.

236.09 million were broadband subscribers. 370 million is the figure of wireless

internet subscribers. The total internet subscribers per 100 population stood at 30.56;

urban internet subscribers were 68.86 per 100 population; and rural internet

subscribers being 13.08. The figures only increase.



173     The age of information has resulted in complex issues for informational privacy.

These issues arise from the nature of information itself. Information has three facets:

174     Data Mining processes together with knowledge discovery can be combined to

create facts about individuals. Metadata and the internet of things have the ability to

redefine human existence in ways which are yet fully to be perceived. This, as

Christina Moniodis states in her illuminating article results in the creation of new

knowledge about individuals; something which even she or he did not possess. This

poses serious issues for the Court. In an age of rapidly evolving technology it is

impossible for a judge to conceive of all the possible uses of information or its

consequences:

175     Daniel J Solove deals with the problem of “aggregation”. Businesses and

governments often aggregate a variety of information fragments, including pieces of

information which may not be viewed as private in isolation to create a detailed portrait

of personalities and behaviour of individuals.396 Yet, it is now a universally accepted

fact that information and data flow are “increasingly central to social and economic

ordering”397. Individuals are identified with reference to tax records, voting eligibility,

and government-provided entitlements. There is what is now described as “‘veillant

panoptic assemblage’, where data gathered through the ordinary citizen’s veillance395Ibid, at page 4396Christina P. Moniodis, “Moving from Nixon to NASA: Privacy ‘s Second Strand- A Right to Informational
    Privacy”, Yale Journal of Law and Technology (2012), Vol. 15 (1), at page 159. The article attributes Daniel
    Solove’s work on privacy as- Daniel J. Solove, Understanding Privacy 70 (2008).397Ibid, at page 156251PART S


practices finds its way to state surveillance mechanisms, through the corporations that

hold that data”398.

176        The balance between data regulation and individual privacy raises complex

issues requiring delicate balances to be drawn between the legitimate concerns of the

State on one hand and individual interest in the protection of privacy on the other.


177        The sphere of privacy stretches at one end to those intimate matters to which

a reasonable expectation of privacy may attach. It expresses a right to be left alone.

A broader connotation which has emerged in academic literature of a comparatively

recent origin is related to the protection of one’s identity. Data protection relates

closely with the latter sphere. Data such as medical information would be a category

to which a reasonable expectation of privacy attaches. There may be other data which

falls outside the reasonable expectation paradigm. Apart from safeguarding privacy,

data protection regimes seek to protect the autonomy of the individual. This is evident

from the emphasis in the European data protection regime on the centrality of consent.

Related to the issue of consent is the requirement of transparency which requires a

disclosure by the data recipient of information pertaining to data transfer and use.



178        Another aspect which data protection regimes seek to safeguard is the principle

of non-discrimination which ensures that the collection of data should be carried out398Yvonne McDermott, “Conceptualizing the right to data protection in an era of Big Data”, Big Data and Society
      (2017), at page 4.

252PART S


in a manner which does not discriminate on the basis of racial or ethnic origin, political

or religious beliefs, genetic or health status or sexual orientation.



179     Formulation of a regime for data protection is a complex exercise which needs

to be undertaken by the State after a careful balancing of the requirements of privacy

coupled with other values which the protection of data sub-serves together with the

legitimate concerns of the State. One of the chief concerns which the formulation of

a data protection regime has to take into account is that while the web is a source of

lawful activity-both personal and commercial, concerns of national security intervene

since the seamless structure of the web can be exploited by terrorists to wreak havoc

and destruction on civilised societies. Cyber attacks can threaten financial systems.

Richard A Posner, in an illuminating article, has observed:

180          While it intervenes to protect legitimate state interests, the state must

nevertheless put into place a robust regime that ensures the fulfilment of a three-fold

requirement. These three requirements apply to all restraints on privacy (not just

informational privacy). They emanate from the procedural and content-based

mandate ofArticle 21.The first requirement that there must be a law in existence to

justify an encroachment on privacy is an express requirement ofArticle 21.For, no

person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty except in accordance with the

procedure established by law. The existence of law is an essential requirement.

Second, the requirement of a need, in terms of a legitimate state aim, ensures that

the nature and content of the law which imposes the restriction falls within the zone of

reasonableness mandated byArticle 14, which is a guarantee against arbitrary state

action. The pursuit of a legitimate state aim ensures that the law does not suffer from400Ibid401Ibid254PART S


manifest arbitrariness. Legitimacy, as a postulate, involves a value judgment. Judicial

review does not re-appreciate or second guess the value judgment of the legislature

but is for deciding whether the aim which is sought to be pursued suffers from palpable

or manifest arbitrariness. The third requirement ensures that the means which are

adopted by the legislature are proportional to the object and needs sought to be

fulfilled by the law. Proportionality is an essential facet of the guarantee against

arbitrary state action because it ensures that the nature and quality of the

encroachment on the right is not disproportionate to the purpose of the law. Hence,

the three-fold requirement for a valid law arises out of the mutual inter-dependence

between the fundamental guarantees against arbitrariness on the one hand and the

protection of life and personal liberty, on the other. The right to privacy, which is an

intrinsic part of the right to life and liberty, and the freedoms embodied in Part III is

subject to the same restraints which apply to those freedoms.



181   Apart from national security, the state may have justifiable reasons for the

collection and storage of data. In a social welfare state, the government embarks

upon programmes which provide benefits to impoverished and marginalised sections

of society. There is a vital state interest in ensuring that scarce public resources are

not dissipated by the diversion of resources to persons who do not qualify as

recipients. Allocation of resources for human development is coupled with a legitimate

concern that the utilisation of resources should not be siphoned away for extraneous

purposes. Data mining with the object of ensuring that resources are properly

deployed to legitimate beneficiaries is a valid ground for the state to insist on the255PART S


 collection of authentic data. But, the data which the state has collected has to be

 utilised for legitimate purposes of the state and ought not to be utilised unauthorizedly

 for extraneous purposes. This will ensure that the legitimate concerns of the state are

 duly safeguarded while, at the same time, protecting privacy concerns. Prevention

 and investigation of crime and protection of the revenue are among the legitimate

 aims of the state. Digital platforms are a vital tool of ensuring good governance in a

 social welfare state. Information technology – legitimately deployed is a powerful

 enabler in the spread of innovation and knowledge.

182       A distinction has been made in contemporary literature between anonymity on

 one hand and privacy on the other.402 Both anonymity and privacy prevent others from

 gaining access to pieces of personal information yet they do so in opposite ways.

 Privacy involves hiding information whereas anonymity involves hiding what makes it

 personal. An unauthorised parting of the medical records of an individual which have

 been furnished to a hospital will amount to an invasion of privacy. On the other hand,

 the state may assert a legitimate interest in analysing data borne from hospital records

 to understand and deal with a public health epidemic such as malaria or dengue to

 obviate a serious impact on the population. If the State preserves the anonymity of the

 individual it could legitimately assert a valid state interest in the preservation of public

 health to design appropriate policy interventions on the basis of the data available to

 it.

402

See in this connection, Jeffrey M. Skopek, “Reasonable Expectations of Anonymity”, Virginia Law Review
      (2015), Vol.101, at pages 691-762256PART S




183    Privacy has been held to be an intrinsic element of the right to life and personal

liberty underArticle 21and as a constitutional value which is embodied in the

fundamental freedoms embedded in Part III of the Constitution. Like the right to life

and liberty, privacy is not absolute. The limitations which operate on the right to life

and personal liberty would operate on the right to privacy.                  Any curtailment or

deprivation of that right would have to take place under a regime of law. The procedure

established by law must be fair, just and reasonable. The law which provides for the

curtailment of the right must also be subject to constitutional safeguards.



184    The Union government constituted a Group of Experts on privacy under the

auspices of the erstwhile Planning Commission. The Expert Group in its Report403

(dated 16 October 2012) proposed a framework for the protection of privacy concerns

which, it was expected, would serve as a conceptual foundation for legislation

protecting privacy. The framework suggested by the expert group was based on five

salient features: (i) Technological neutrality and interoperability with international

standards; (ii) Multi-Dimensional privacy; (iii) Horizontal applicability to state and non-

state entities; (iv) Conformity with privacy principles; and (v) A co-regulatory

enforcement regime. After reviewing international best practices, the Expert Group

proposed nine privacy principles. They are:

403

Such collection shall be through lawful and fair means;

(iv) Purpose Limitation: Personal data collected and processed by data controllers

    should be adequate and relevant to the purposes for which it is processed. A data

    controller shall collect, process, disclose, make available, or otherwise use

    personal information only for the purposes as stated in the notice after taking

    consent of individuals. If there is a change of purpose, this must be notified to the

    individual. After personal information has been used in accordance with the

    identified purpose it should be destroyed as per the identified procedures. Data

    retention mandates by the government should be in compliance with the National

    Privacy Principles;

(v) Access and Correction: Individuals shall have access to personal information

    about them held by a data controller; shall be able to seek correction,

    amendments, or deletion of such information where it is inaccurate; be able to

    confirm that a data controller holds or is processing information about them; be258PART S


    able to obtain from the data controller a copy of the personal data. Access and

    correction to personal information may not be given by the data controller if it is

    not, despite best efforts, possible to do so without affecting the privacy rights of

    another person, unless that person has explicitly consented to disclosure;

(vi) Disclosure of Information: A data controller shall not disclose personal information

    to third parties, except after providing notice and seeking informed consent from

    the individual for such disclosure. Third parties are bound to adhere to relevant

    and applicable privacy principles. Disclosure for law enforcement purposes must

    be in accordance with the laws in force. Data controllers shall not publish or in any

    other way make public personal information, including personal sensitive

    information;

(vii) Security: A data controller shall secure personal information that they have either

    collected or have in their custody, by reasonable security safeguards against loss,

    unauthorised access, destruction, use, processing, storage, modification,

    deanonymization, unauthorized disclosure [either accidental or incidental] or other

    reasonably foreseeable risks;

(viii) Openness: A data controller shall take all necessary steps to implement

    practices, procedures, policies and systems in a manner proportional to the scale,

    scope, and sensitivity to the data they collect, in order to ensure compliance with

    the privacy principles, information regarding which shall be made in an intelligible

    form, using clear and plain language, available to all individuals; and

(ix) Accountability:   The data controller shall be accountable for complying with

    measures which give effect to the privacy principles. Such measures should259PART T


      include mechanisms to implement privacy policies; including tools, training, and

      education; external and internal audits, and requiring organizations or overseeing

      bodies extend all necessary support to the Privacy Commissioner and comply

      with the specific and general orders of the Privacy Commissioner.


185      During the course of the hearing of these proceedings, the Union government

has placed on the record an Office Memorandum dated 31 July 2017 by which it has

constituted a committee chaired by Justice B N Srikrishna, former Judge of the

Supreme Court of India to review inter alia data protection norms in the country and

to make its recommendations. The terms of reference of the Committee are :

Since the government has initiated the process of reviewing the entire area of data

protection, it would be appropriate to leave the matter for expert determination so that

a robust regime for the protection of data is put into place. We expect that the Union

government shall follow up on its decision by taking all necessary and proper steps.

T        Our Conclusions


1 The judgment in M P Sharma holds essentially that in the absence of a provision

    similar to the Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution, the right to privacy cannot260PART T


  be read into the provisions ofArticle 20 (3)of the Indian Constitution. The judgment

  does not specifically adjudicate on whether a right to privacy would arise from any

  of the other provisions of the rights guaranteed by Part III includingArticle 21andArticle 19.The observation that privacy is not a right guaranteed by the Indian

  Constitution is not reflective of the correct position. M P Sharma is overruled to the

  extent to which it indicates to the contrary.

2 Kharak Singh has correctly held that the content of the expression ‘life’ underArticle 21means not merely the right to a person’s “animal existence” and that the

   expression ‘personal liberty’ is a guarantee against invasion into the sanctity of a

   person’s home or an intrusion into personal security. Kharak Singh also correctly

   laid down that the dignity of the individual must lend content to the meaning of

   ‘personal liberty’. The first part of the decision in Kharak Singh which invalidated

   domiciliary visits at night on the ground that they violated ordered liberty is an

   implicit recognition of the right to privacy. The second part of the decision,

   however, which holds that the right to privacy is not a guaranteed right under our

   Constitution, is not reflective of the correct position. Similarly, Kharak Singh’s

   reliance upon the decision of the majority in Gopalan is not reflective of the correct

   position in view of the decisions in Cooper and in Maneka. Kharak Singh to the

   extent that it holds that the right to privacy is not protected under the Indian

   Constitution is overruled.

261PART T


3 (A) Life and personal liberty are inalienable rights. These are rights which are

   inseparable from a dignified human existence.        The dignity of the individual,

   equality between human beings and the quest for liberty are the foundational pillars

   of the Indian Constitution;

(B) Life and personal liberty are not creations of the Constitution. These rights are

   recognised by the Constitution as inhering in each individual as an intrinsic and

   inseparable part of the human element which dwells within;


(C) Privacy is a constitutionally protected right which emerges primarily from the

   guarantee of life and personal liberty inArticle 21of the Constitution. Elements of

   privacy also arise in varying contexts from the other facets of freedom and dignity

   recognised and guaranteed by the fundamental rights contained in Part III;


(D) Judicial recognition of the existence of a constitutional right of privacy is not an

   exercise in the nature of amending the Constitution nor is the Court embarking on

   a constitutional function of that nature which is entrusted to Parliament;


(E) Privacy is the constitutional core of human dignity. Privacy has both a normative

   and descriptive function. At a normative level privacy sub-serves those eternal

   values upon which the guarantees of life, liberty and freedom are founded. At a

   descriptive level, privacy postulates a bundle of entitlements and interests which

   lie at the foundation of ordered liberty;

262PART T


(F) Privacy includes at its core the preservation of personal intimacies, the sanctity of

   family life, marriage, procreation, the home and sexual orientation. Privacy also

   connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy safeguards individual autonomy and

   recognises the ability of the individual to control vital aspects of his or her life.

   Personal choices governing a way of life are intrinsic to privacy. Privacy protects

   heterogeneity and recognises the plurality and diversity of our culture. While the

   legitimate expectation of privacy may vary from the intimate zone to the private

   zone and from the private to the public arenas, it is important to underscore that

   privacy is not lost or surrendered merely because the individual is in a public place.

   Privacy attaches to the person since it is an essential facet of the dignity of the

   human being;

(G) This Court has not embarked upon an exhaustive enumeration or a catalogue of

    entitlements or interests comprised in the right to privacy. The Constitution must

    evolve with the felt necessities of time to meet the challenges thrown up in a

    democratic order governed by the rule of law. The meaning of the Constitution

    cannot be frozen on the perspectives present when it was adopted. Technological

    change has given rise to concerns which were not present seven decades ago

    and the rapid growth of technology may render obsolescent many notions of the

    present. Hence the interpretation of the Constitution must be resilient and flexible

    to allow future generations to adapt its content bearing in mind its basic or

    essential features;

263PART T


(H) Like other rights which form part of the fundamental freedoms protected by Part

   III, including the right to life and personal liberty underArticle 21, privacy is not an

   absolute right. A law which encroaches upon privacy will have to withstand the

   touchstone of permissible restrictions on fundamental rights. In the context ofArticle 21an invasion of privacy must be justified on the basis of a law which

   stipulates a procedure which is fair, just and reasonable. The law must also be

   valid with reference to the encroachment on life and personal liberty under Article

21. An invasion of life or personal liberty must meet the three-fold requirement of

(i) legality, which postulates the existence of law; (ii) need, defined in terms of a

   legitimate state aim; and (iii) proportionality which ensures a rational nexus

   between the objects and the means adopted to achieve them; and


(I) Privacy has both positive and negative content. The negative content restrains the

   state from committing an intrusion upon the life and personal liberty of a citizen. Its

   positive content imposes an obligation on the state to take all necessary measures

   to protect the privacy of the individual.

4 Decisions rendered by this Court subsequent to Kharak Singh, upholding the right

   to privacy would be read subject to the above principles.


5 Informational privacy is a facet of the right to privacy. The dangers to privacy in

   an age of information can originate not only from the state but from non-state actors

   as well. We commend to the Union Government the need to examine and put into

   place a robust regime for data protection. The creation of such a regime requires264PART T


   a careful and sensitive balance between individual interests and legitimate

   concerns of the state. The legitimate aims of the state would include for instance

   protecting national security, preventing and investigating crime, encouraging

   innovation and the spread of knowledge, and preventing the dissipation of social

   welfare benefits. These are matters of policy to be considered by the Union

   government while designing a carefully structured regime for the protection of the

   data. Since the Union government has informed the Court that it has constituted a

   Committee chaired by Hon’ble Shri Justice B N Srikrishna, former Judge of this

   Court, for that purpose, the matter shall be dealt with appropriately by the Union

   government having due regard to what has been set out in this judgment.


6 The reference is answered in the above terms.

...........................................CJI
                                                      [JAGDISH SINGH KHEHAR]




                                                     ..............................................J
                                                       [R K AGRAWAL]




                                                     ..............................................J
                                                       [Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD]265PART T




                                .............................................J
                                  [S ABDUL NAZEER]




New Delhi;

Dated : 24, August 2017266Reportable
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
            WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.494 OF 2012
Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) & Another   …   Petitioners
         Versus
Union of India & Others                     …   Respondents


                             WITH
         TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO.151 OF 2013

         TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO.152 OF 2013

           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 833 OF 2013

           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 829 OF 2013

           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 932 OF 2013

        CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 144 OF 2014
                           IN
          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

        TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 313 OF 2014

        TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 312 OF 2014

   SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 2524 OF 2014

            WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 37 OF 2015

           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 220 OF 2015

        CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 674 OF 2015
                          IN
           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 829 OF 2013

        TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 921 OF 2015

        CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 470 OF 2015
                           IN
          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

        CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 444 OF 2016
                           IN
          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

        CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 608 OF 2016
                           IN
          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 797 OF 2016

        CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 844 OF 2017
                           IN
          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 342 OF 2017

           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 372 OF 2017


                        JUDGMENT
Chelameswar, J.

1.   I have had the advantage of reading the opinion of my learned

brothers Justice Nariman and Justice Chandrachud. Both of them

in depth dealt with various questions that are required to be

examined by this Bench, to answer the reference.      The factual

background in which these questions arise and the history of the2instant litigation is set out in the judgments of my learned brothers.

There is no need to repeat. Having regard to the importance of the

matter, I am unable to desist recording few of my views regarding

the various questions which were debated in this matter.

2.  The following three questions, in my opinion, constitute the
crux of the enquiry;

(i)     Is there any Fundamental Right to Privacy under the
        Constitution of India?

(ii)    If it exists, where is it located?

(iii)   What are the contours of such Right?

3.      These questions arose because Union of India and some of the

respondents took a stand that, in view of two larger bench

judgments of this Court1, no fundamental right of privacy is

guaranteed under the Constitution.

4.      Therefore, at the outset, it is necessary to examine whether it

is the ratio decidendi of M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh that under

our Constitution there is no Fundamental Right of Privacy; and if

that be indeed the ratio of either of the two rulings whether they

were rightly decided? The issue which fell for the consideration of1M.P. Sharma & Others v. Satish Chandra & Others, AIR 1954 SC 300 and Kharak Singh v. State of U.P. &
Others, AIR 1963 SC 1295, (both decisions of Constitution Bench of Eight and Six Judges respectively).3this Court in M.P. Sharma was – whether seizure of documents from

the custody of a person accused of an offence would amount to

“testimonial compulsion” prohibited underArticle 20(3)of our

Constitution?

5.       The rule against the “testimonial compulsion” is contained inArticle 20(3)2of our Constitution.                                 The expression “testimonial

compulsion” is not found in that provision. The mandate contained

inArticle 20(3)came to be described as the rule against testimonial

compulsion. The rule against self-incrimination owes its origin to

the revulsion against the inquisitorial methods adopted by the Star

Chamber of England3 and the same was incorporated in the Fifth

Amendment of the American Constitution.42“Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India: “No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness
against himself.”3“In English law, this principle of protection against self-incrimination had a historical origin. It resulted from a
feeling of revulsion against the inquisitorial methods adopted and the barbarous sentences imposed, by the Court of
Star Chamber, in the exercise of its criminal jurisdiction. This came to a head in the case of John Lilburn, 3 State
Trials 1315, which brought about the abolition of the Star Chamber and the firm recognition of the principle that the
accused should not be put on oath and that no evidence should be taken from him. This principle, in course of time,
developed into its logical extensions, by way of privilege of witnesses against self-incrimination, when called for
giving oral testimony or for production of documents. A change was introduced by the Criminal Evidence Act of
1898 by making an accused a competent witness on his own behalf, if he applied for it. But so far as the oral
testimony of witnesses and the production of documents are concerned, the protection against self-incrimination
continued as before. (See Phipson on Evidence, 9th Edition, pages 215 and 474).

These principles, as they were before the statutory change in 1898, were carried into the American legal system
and became part of its common law. (See Wigmore on Evidence, Vol.VIII, pages 301 to 303). This was later on
incorporated into their Constitution by virtue of the Fifth Amendment thereof.”4“Amendment V of the American Constitution: "No person ……..shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a
witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law …"4

6.      Does the rule against “testimonial compulsion”, entrenched as

a fundamental right under our Constitution create a right of

privacy? - is a question not examined in M.P. Sharma.                                                 It was

argued in M.P. Sharma “that a search to obtain documents for investigation

into an offence is a compulsory procuring of incriminatory evidence from the

accused himself and is, therefore, hit byArticle 20(3)…” by necessary

implication flowing from “certain canons of liberal construction”.                               Originally

the rule was invoked only against oral evidence.                                    But the judgment

in Boyd v. United States5, extended the rule even to documents

procured during the course of a constitutionally impermissible

search6.

This Court refused to read the principle enunciated in Boyd

intoArticle 20(3)on the ground: “we have nothing in our Constitution

corresponding to the Fourth Amendment”.

This Court held that the power of search and seizure is “an

overriding power of the State for the protection of social security”. It further

held that such power (1) “is necessarily regulated by law”; and (2) Since the

Constitution makers have not made any provision “analogous to the5116 US 6166A search in violation of the safeguards provided under the Fourth Amendment – “The right of the people to be
secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly
describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.”5American Fourth Amendment”, such a requirement could not be read intoArticle 20(3).

It was in the said context that this Court referred to the right
of privacy:

That is the boundary of M.P. Singh’s ratio. Such a conclusion, in

my opinion, requires a further examination in an appropriate

case since it is now too well settled that the text                   of       the

Constitution is only the primary source for understanding the

Constitution and the silences of the Constitution are also to

be ascertained to understand the Constitution. Even according to

the American Supreme Court, the Fourth Amendment is not the6sole repository of the right to privacy7. Therefore, values other than

those informing the Fourth Amendment can ground a right of

privacy if such values are a part of the Indian Constitutional

framework, and M.P. Sharma does not contemplate this possibility

nor was there an occasion, therefore as the case was concerned

withArticle         20(3).Especially            so      as       the       Gopalan           era

compartmentalization ruled the roost during the time of the M.P.

Sharma ruling and there was no Maneka Gandhi interpretation of

Part III as a cohesive and fused code as is presently.

Whether the right of privacy is implied in any other

fundamental right guaranteed underArticles 21, 14, 19or 25 etc.

was not examined in M.P Sharma.                                      The question whether a

fundamental right of privacy is implied from these Articles, is

therefore, res integra and M.P. Sharma is no authority on that

aspect. I am, therefore, of the opinion that M.P. Sharma is not an

authority for an absolute proposition that there is no right of

privacy under our Constitution; and such is not the ratio of that

judgment.

7In Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 US 479, Douglas, J who delivered the opinion of the Court opined that the I, II,
IV, V and IX Amendments creates zones of privacy. Goldberg, J. opined that even the XIV Amendment creates a
zone of privacy. This undoubtedly grounds a right of privacy beyond the IV amendment. Even after Griswold, other
cases like Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973) have made this point amply clear by sourcing a constitutional right of
privacy from sources other than the IV amendment.

8.     The issue in Kharak Singh was the constitutionality of police

regulations of UP which inter alia provided for ‘surveillance’ of

certain categories            of people         by various            methods, such as,

domiciliary visits at night’, ‘verification of movements and absences’

etc.    Two judgments (4:2) were delivered.                      Majority took the view

that the impugned regulation insofar as it provided for ‘domiciliary

visits at night’ is unconstitutional whereas the minority opined the

impugned regulation is in its entirety unconstitutional.

The Court was invited to examine whether the impugned

regulations violated the fundamental rights of Kharak Singh

guaranteed underArticles 21and19(1)(d).In that context, this

Court examined the scope of the expression ‘personal liberty’

guaranteed underArticle 21.Majority declared that the expression

“personal liberty” occurring underArticle 21:“is used in the Article as

compendious term to include within itself all the varieties of rights which go to make up the

“personal liberties” of man other than those dealt with in several clauses ofArticle 19(1)”. In

other words, whileArticle 19(1)deals with particular species or attributes of that freedom,

personal liberty inArticle 21takes in and comprises the residue.”

9.     The      Kharak Singh majority opined                          that the   impugned

regulation insofar as it provided for ‘domiciliary visits’ is plainly8“violative of Article 21”. The majority took note of the American decision

in Wolf v. Colorado, 338 US 25 wherein it was held that State lacks

the authority to sanction “incursion into privacy” of citizens.      Such a

power would run counter to the guarantee of the Fourteenth

Amendment8 and against the “very essence of a scheme of ordered liberty”.9 The

majority judgment in Kharak Singh noticed that the conclusion

recorded in Wolf v. Colorado is based on the prohibition contained

in the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, and a

corresponding provision is absent in our Constitution. Nonetheless,

their Lordships concluded that the impugned regulation insofar as

it sanctioned domiciliary visits is plainly violative ofArticle 21.For

this conclusion, their Lordships relied upon the English Common

Law maxim that “every man's house is his castle"10. In substance

domiciliary visits violate liberty guaranteed underArticle 21.

The twin conclusions recorded, viz., that Article 21 takes

within its sweep various rights other than mere freedom from

physical restraint; and domiciliary visits by police violate the right

of Kharak Singh guaranteed under Article 21, are a great leap from8Frankfurter, J.

Murphy, J.

See (1604) 5 Coke 91 – Semayne’s case9the law declared by this Court in Gopalan11 - much before R.C.

Cooper12 and Maneka Gandhi13 cases. The logical inconsistency in

the judgment is that while on the one hand their Lordships opined

that the maxim “every man’s house is his castle” is a part of the liberty

underArticle 21, concluded on the other, that absence of a

provision akin to the U.S. Fourth Amendment would negate the

claim to the right of privacy.                         Both statements are logically

inconsistent.          In the earlier part of the judgment their Lordships

noticed14 that it is the English Common Law which formed the basis

of the U.S. Fourth Amendment and is required to be read intoArticle 21;but nevertheless declined to read the right of privacy intoArticle 21.This is the incongruence.

10.Interestingly as observed by Justice Nariman, when it came to

the constitutionality of the other provisions impugned in Kharak

Singh, their Lordships held that such provisions are not violative ofArticle      21since       there      is     no   right   to   privacy   under   our11A.K. Gopalan Vs. State of MadrasAIR 1950 SC 2712RC Cooper Vs. Union of India (1970) 1 SCC 24813Maneka Gandhi Vs. Union of India(1978) 1 SCC 24814See F/N 3 (supra)10Constitution15. I completely endorse the view of my learned brother

Nariman in this regard.

11. I now proceed to examine the salient features of the minority

view.

(i)     Disagreement with the majority on the conclusion

                thatArticle 21contains those aspects of personal

                liberty excluding those enumerated underArticle

                19(1);

(ii)    after noticing that Gopalan held that the expression

                “personal liberty” occurring underArticle 21is only

                the antithesis of physical restraint or coercion,

                opined that in modern world coercion need not only

                be physical coercion but can also take the form of

                psychological coercion;

(iii)   “further the right to personal liberty takes in not only a right to be free

                from restrictions placed on his movements, but also free from

                encroachments on his private life.”;

15Nor do we consider thatArticle 21has any relevance in the context as was sought to be suggested by learned
Counsel for the petitioner. As already pointed out, the right of privacy is not a guaranteed right under our
Constitution and therefore the attempt to ascertain the movements of an individual which is merely a manner in
which privacy is invaded is not an infringement of a fundamental right guaranteed by Part III.11

(iv)     Though “our Constitution does not expressly declare the right to

                    privacy as a fundamental right”, “the said right is an essential

                    ingredient of personal liberty”.

In substance Kharak Singh declared that the expression

“personal liberty” inArticle 21takes within its sweep a bundle of

rights.           Both the majority and minority are ad idem on that

conclusion. The only point of divergence is that the minority opined

that one of the rights in the bundle is the right of privacy. In the

opinion of the minority the right to privacy is “an essential ingredient of

personal liberty”. Whereas the majority opined that “the right of privacy

is not a guaranteed right under our Constitution”, and therefore the same

cannot be read intoArticle 21.16

12. I am of the opinion that the approach adopted by the majority

is illogical and against settled principles of interpretation of even an

ordinary statute; and wholly unwarranted in the context of

constitutional interpretation. If a right is recognised by the express

language of a statute, no question of implying such a right from16Kharak Singh v. The State of U.P. & Others, (1962) 1 SCR 332 at page 351
      “… Nor do we consider thatArticle 21has any relevance in the context as was sought to be suggested by
      learned Counsel for the petitioner. As already pointed out, the right of privacy is not a guaranteed right
      under our Constitution and therefore the attempt to ascertain the movements of an individual which is
      merely a manner in which privacy is invaded is not an infringement of a fundamental right guaranteed by
      Part III.”12some provision of such statute arises.                                      Implications are logical

extensions of stipulations in the express language of the statute

and arise only when a statute is silent on certain aspects.

Implications are the product of the interpretative process, of

silences of a Statute.                       It is by now well settled that there are

implications even in written Constitutions.17 The scope and

amplitude of implications are to be ascertained in the light of the

scheme and purpose sought to be achieved by a statute.                                                     The

purpose of the statute is to be ascertained from the overall scheme

of the statute. Constitution is the fundamental law adumbrating

the powers and duties of the various organs of the State and rights

of the SUBJECTS18 and limitations thereon, of the State.                                               In my

opinion, provisions purportedly conferring power on the State are in

fact limitations on the State power to infringe on the liberty of

SUBJECTS.In the context of the interpretation of a Constitution17(1947) 74 CLR 31 –The Melbourne Corporation v. The Commonwealth“ ... Thus, the purpose of the Constitution, and the scheme by which it is intended to be given effect,
      necessarily give rise to implications as to the manner in which the Commonwealth and the States
      respectively may exercise their powers, vis-à-vis each other.”

      Also see:His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru v. State of Kerala & Another, (1973) 4 SCC22518Citizens and non-citizens who are amenable to the Constitutional authority of the State13the intensity of analysis to ascertain the purpose is required to be

more profound.19


          The implications arising from the scheme of the Constitution

are “Constitution’s dark matter” and are as important as the

express stipulations in its text.                               The principlelaid down bythis

Court in Kesvananda20, that the basic structure of the Constitution

cannot be abrogated is the most outstanding and brilliant

exposition of the ‘dark matter’ and is a part of our Constitution,

though there is nothing in the text suggesting that principle. The19Two categories of Constitutional interpretation - textualist and living constitutionalist approach are well known.The former, as is illustrated by theGopalancase, focuses on the text at hand i.e. the language of the relevant
provision. The text and the intent of the original framers are determinative under the textualist approach. The living
constitutionalist approach, while acknowledging the importance of the text, takes into account a variety of factors as
aids to interpret the text. Depending on the nature of factor used, academics have added further nuance to the this
approach of interpretation (For instance, in his book titled ‘Constitutional Interpretation’ (which builds on his earlier
work titled ‘Constitutional Fate’), Philip Bobbitt categorizes the six approaches to interpretation of Constitutions as
historical, textual, prudential, doctrinal, structural, and ethical. The latter four approaches treat the text as less
determinative than the former two approaches).

This court has progressively adopted a living constitutionalist approach. Varyingly, it has interpreted the
Constitutional text by reference to Constitutional values (liberal democratic ideals which form the bedrock on which
our text sits); a mix of cultural, social, political and historical ethos which surround our Constitutional text; a
structuralist technique typified by looking at the structural divisions of power within the Constitution and
interpreting it as an integrated whole etc. This court need not, in the abstract, fit a particular interpretative technique
within specific pigeonholes of a living constitutionalist interpretation. Depending on which particular source is most
useful and what the matter at hand warrants, the court can resort to variants of a living constitutionalist
interpretation. This lack of rigidity allows for an enduring constitution.

The important criticisms against the living constitutionalist approach are that of uncertainty and that it can lead to
arbitrary exercise of judicial power. The living constitutionalist approach in my view is preferable despite these
criticisms, for two reasons. First, adaptability cannot be equated to lack of discipline in judicial reasoning. Second, it
is still the text of the constitution which acquires the requisite interpretative hues and therefore, it is not as if there is
violence being perpetrated upon the text if one resorts to the living constitutionalist approach.20

His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru & Others. v. State of Kerala & Another (1973) 4 SCC 22514necessity of probing seriously and respectfully into the invisible

portion of the Constitution cannot be ignored without being

disrespectful to the hard earned political freedom and the declared

aspirations of the liberty of ‘we the people of India’.                                            The text of

enumerated fundamental rights is “only the primary source of expressed

information” as to what is meant by liberty proclaimed by the

preamble of the Constitution.

13. To embrace a rule that the text of the Constitution is the only

material to be looked at to understand the purpose and scheme of

the Constitution would not only be detrimental to liberties of

SUBJECTS but could also render the administration of the State

unduly cumbersome. Fortunately, this Court did not adopt such a

rule of interpretation barring exceptions likeGopalan(supra) and

ADM Jabalpur21.Else, this Court could not have found the freedom

of press underArticle 19(1)(a)and the other rights22 which were21ADM Jabalpur Vs. S.S. Shukla AIR 1976 SC 120722Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. & Others etc. v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 305 at page 311
      “Para 28. It must be borne in mind that the Constitution must be interpreted in a broad way and not in a narrow
      and pedantic sense. Certain rights have been enshrined in our Constitution as fundamental and, therefore, while
      considering the nature and content of those rights the Court must not be too astute to interpret the language of
      the Constitution in so literal a sense as to whittle them down. On the other hand the Court must interpret the
      Constitution in a manner which would enable the citizen to enjoy the rights guaranteed by it in the fullest
      measure subject, of course, to permissible restrictions. Bearing this principle in mind it would be clear that the
      right to freedom of speech and expression carries with it the right to publish and circulate one's ideas, opinions
      and views with complete freedom and by resorting to any available means of publication, subject again to such
      restrictions as could be legitimately imposed under clause (2) ofArticle 19.The first decision of this Court in
      which this was recognized isRomesh Thapar v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 124.. There, this Court held that15held to be flowing from the guarantee underArticle 21.Romesh

Thappar23             and         Sakal          Papers(supra)          are        the        earliest

acknowledgment by this Court of the existence of Constitution’s

dark matter.             The series of cases in which this Court subsequently

perceived various rights in the expression ‘life’ inArticle 21is a

resounding confirmation of such acknowledgment.

14. The U.S. VIth Amendment confers a “right to speedy and public

trial” to the accused, the right “to be informed of the nature and cause of

the accusation”, the right to have the “assistance of counsel for his defence”

etc.       None of those rights are expressed in the text of our

Constitution.              Nonetheless, this Court declared these rights as

implicit in the text ofArticles 14or 21. The VIIIth Amendment24 of

the      American             Constitution              contains           stipulations            prohibiting

excessive bails, fines, cruel and unusual punishments etc. Cruel

punishments were not unknown to this country.They were in

vogue in the middle ages.                           Flaying a man alive was one of the


     freedom of speech and expression includes freedom of propagation of ideas and that this freedom is ensured by
     the freedom of circulation. In that case this Court has also pointed out that freedom of speech and expression are
     the foundation of all democratic organisations and are essential for the proper functioning of the processes of
     democracy. ...”23Romesh Thappar Vs. State of MadrasAIR 1950 SC 12424“VIII Amendment to the American Constitution:

15. This Court by an interpretive process read the right to earn a

livelihood26, the right to education27, the right to speedy trial28, the

right to protect one’s reputation29 and the right to have an

environment free of pollution30 in the expression ‘life’ underArticle

21of the Indian Constitution.

Similarly, the right to go abroad31 and the right to speedy trial

of criminal cases32 were read into the expression liberty occurring25Mithu Etc. Vs. State of Punjab Etc. Etc., AIR 1983 SC 473 - “If a law were to provide that the offence of theft will
be punishable with the penalty of the cutting of hands, the law will be bad as violatingArticle 21.A savage
sentence is anathema to the civilized jurisprudence of Article 21.”26Olga Tellis Vs. Bombay Municipal Corporation(1985) 3 SCC 54527Mohini Jain Vs. State of Karnataka (1992) 3 SCC 666, Unnikrishnan J.P. Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh(1993) 1
SCC 64528Mansukhlal Vithaldas Chauhan Vs. State of Gujarat(1997) 7 SCC 62229State of Bihar Vs. Lal Krishna Advani(2003) 8 SCC 36130Shantistar Builders Vs. Narayan Khimalal Totame(1990) 1 SCC 520, M.C. Mehta Vs. Kamal Nath(2000) 6 SCC201331Satwant Singh Sawhney Vs. Asst.Passport Officer 1967 (3) SCR 525,32InRe. Hussainara Khatoon & Ors. Vs. Home Secretary, Home Secretary, Bihar(1980) 1 SCC 8117underArticle 21.This court found delayed execution of capital

punishment violated both the rights of life and ‘liberty’ guaranteed

under Article 2133 and also perceived reproductive rights and the

individual’s autonomy regarding sterilization to being inherent in

the rights of life and liberty under Art. 2134.

16. None of the above-mentioned rights are to be found anywhere

in the text of the Constitution.

17. To sanctify an argument that whatever is not found in the text

of the Constitution cannot become a part of the Constitution would

be too primitive an understanding of the Constitution and contrary

to settled cannons of constitutional interpretation. Such an

approach regarding the rights and liberties of citizens would be an

affront to the collective wisdom of our people and the wisdom of the

members of the Constituent Assembly. The fact that some of the

members opined during the course of debates in that Assembly,

that the right of privacy need not find an express mention in the

Constitution, would not necessarily lead to the conclusion that they

were         oblivious         to    the      importance    of   the   right   to   privacy.33

Vatheeswaran, T.V. Vs. State of T.N.(1983) 2 SCC 6834Devika Biswas Vs. Union of India(2016) 10 SCC 72618Constituent Assembly was not a seminar on the right to privacy and

its amplitude.              A close scrutiny of the debates reveals that the

Assembly only considered whether there should be an express

provision guaranteeing the right of privacy in the limited context of

‘searches’ and ‘secrecy of correspondence’.                                Dimensions of the right

of privacy are much larger and were not fully examined. The

question whether the expression ‘liberty’ inArticle 21takes within

its sweep the various aspects of the right of privacy was also not

debated.               The submissions before us revolve around these

questions.           Petitioners assert that the right to privacy is a part of

the rights guaranteed underArticle 19and21and other Articles.

18. The Constitution of any country reflects the aspirations and

goals of the people of that country voiced through the language of

the few chosen individuals entrusted with the responsibility of

framing its Constitution. Such aspirations and goals depend upon

the history of that society. History invariably is a product of various

forces emanating from religious, economic and political events35.35However, various forces which go into the making of history are dynamic. Those who are entrusted with the
responsibility of the working of the Constitution must necessarily keep track of the dynamics of such forces.
Evolution of science and growth of technology is another major factor in the modern world which is equally a factor
to be kept in mind to successfully work the constitution.19The degree of refinement of the Constitution depends upon the

wisdom of the people entrusted with the responsibility of framing

the Constitution. Constitution is not merely a document signed by

284 members of the Constituent Assembly. It is a politically sacred

instrument created by men and women who risked lives and

sacrificed their liberties to fight alien rulers and secured freedom for

our people, not only of their generation but generations to follow.

The Constitution cannot be seen as a document written in ink to

replace one legal regime by another. It is a testament created for

securing the goals professed in the Preamble36.                                            Part-III of the

Constitution is incorporated to ensure achievement of the objects

contained in the Preamble.37 ‘We the People’ of this country are the

intended beneficiaries38 of the Constitution. It must be seen as a

document            written         in     the      blood        of    innumerable              martyrs          of36Kesavananda Bharati (supra)
     “Para 91. … Our Preamble outlines the objectives of the whole constitution.It expresses “what we had thought
     or dreamt for so long”.”37In re, The Kerala Education Bill, 1957, AIR 1958 SC 956
     “… To implement and fortify these supreme purposes set forth in the Preamble, Part III of our Constitution has
     provided for us certain fundamental rights.”38Bidi Supply Co. v. Union of India & Others, AIR 1956 SC 479 at page 487
     “Para 23. After all, for whose benefit was the Constitution enacted? What was the point of making all this other
     about fundamental rights? I am clear that the Constitution is not for the exclusive benefit governments and
     States; it is not only for lawyers and politicians and officials and those highly placed. It also exists for the
     common man, for the poor and the humble, for those who have businesses at stake, for the “butcher, the baker
     and the candlestick maker”. It lays down for this land “a rule of law” as understood in the free democracies of
     the world. It constitutes India into a Sovereign Republic and guarantees in every page rights and freedom to the
     side by side and consistent with the overriding power of the State to act for the common good of all.20Jalianwala Bagh and the like. Man is not a creature of the State.

Life and liberty are not granted by the Constitution. Constitution

only stipulates the limitations on the power of the State to interfere

with our life and liberty.     Law is essential to enjoy the fruits of

liberty; it is not the source of liberty and emphatically not the

exclusive source.

19. To comprehend whether the right to privacy is a Fundamental

Right falling within the sweep of any of the Articles of Part-III, it is

necessary to understand what “fundamental right” and the “right of

privacy” mean conceptually. Rights arise out of custom, contract or

legislation,   including   a   written   Constitution.   The   distinction

between an ordinary legislation and an enacted Constitution is that

the latter is believed and expected to be a relatively permanent piece

of legislation which cannot be abrogated by a simple majority of

representatives elected for a limited tenure to legislative bodies

created thereby. The Constitution of any country is a document

which contains provisions specifying the rules of governance in its

different aspects. It defines the powers of the legislature and the

procedures for law making, the powers of the executive to

administer the State by enforcing the law made by the legislature21and the powers of the judiciary. The underlying belief is that the

Constitution of any country contains certain core political values

and beliefs of the people of that country which cannot normally be

tinkered with lightly, by transient public opinion.

20. The Constitution of India is one such piece of legislation.

Comparable are constitutions of United States of America, Canada

and Australia to mention only some.                              All such Constitutions apart

from containing provisions for administration of the State, contain

provisions specifying or identifying certain rights of citizens and

even some of the rights of non-citizens (both the classes of persons

could be collectively referred to as SUBJECTS for the sake of

convenience).              Such rights came to be described as “basic”,

“primordial”, “inalienable” or “fundamental” rights. Such rights are

a protective wall against State’s power to destroy the liberty of the

SUBJECTS.

Irrespective         of     the      nomenclature               adopted          in      different

countries, such rights are believed in all democratic countries39 to39Bidi Supply Co. v. Union of India & Others, AIR 1956 SC 479
Para 24. I make no apology for turning to older democracies and drawing inspiration from them, for though our law
is an amalgam drawn from many sources, its firmest foundations are rooted in the freedoms of other lands where
men are free in the democratic sense of the term. England has no fundamental rights as such and its Parliament is
supreme but the liberty of the subject is guarded there as jealously as the supremacy of Parliament.”22be rights which cannot be abridged or curtailed totally by ordinary

legislation and unless it is established that it is so necessary to

abridge or curtail those rights in the larger interest of the society.

Several      Constitutions   contain   provisions   stipulating   various

attendant conditions which any legislation intending to abridge

such (fundamental) rights is required to comply with.

21. Provisions of any written Constitution create rights and

obligations, belonging either to individuals or the body politic as

such. For example, the rights which are described as fundamental

rights in Chapter-III of our Constitution are rights of individuals

whereas provisions of dealing with elections to legislative bodies

create rights collectively in the body politic mandating periodic

elections.     They also create rights in favour of individuals to

participate in such electoral process either as an elector or to

become an elected representative of the people/voters.

22. Though each of the rights created by a Constitution is of great

importance for sustenance of a democratic form of Government

chosen by us for achieving certain objectives declared in the23Preamble, the framers of our Constitution believed that some of the

rights enshrined in the Constitution are more crucial to the pursuit

of happiness of the people of India and, therefore, called them

fundamental rights.     The belief is based on the study of human

history and the Constitution of other nations which in turn are

products of historical events.

The scheme of our Constitution is that the power of the State

is divided along a vertical axis between the Union and the States

and along the horizontal axis between the three great branches of

governance, the legislative, the executive and the judiciary. Such

division of power is believed to be conducive to preserving the

liberties of the people of India.   The very purpose of creating a

written Constitution is to secure justice, liberty and equality to the

people of India. Framers of the Constitution believed that certain

freedoms are essential to enjoy the fruits of liberty and that the

State shall not be permitted to trample upon those freedoms except

for achieving certain important and specified objectives in the larger

interests of society.    Therefore, the authority of the State for

making a law inconsistent with fundamental rights, is cabined

within constitutionally proclaimed limitations.24

23. Provisions akin to the Fundamental Rights guaranteed under

our Constitution exist in American Constitution also40.                                                  They are

anterior to our Constitution.

24. The              inter-relationship                 of       various           fundamental                rights

guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution and more specifically

betweenArticles 14, 19and21of the Constitution has been a

matter of great deal of judicial discourse starting from A.K. Gopalan.

The march of the law in this regard is recorded by Justices Nariman

and Chandrachud in detail.

25. R.C. Cooper and Maneka Gandhi gave a different orientation to

the topic.             Justice Bhagwati in Maneka Gandhi speaking for the

majority opined41 that in view of the later decision of this Court in40The first 8 amendments to the Constitution are some of them.41

5. ....It was inKharak Singh v. State of U.P. & Ors.that the question as to the, proper scope and meaning of the
expression personal liberty' came up pointedly for consideration for the first time before this Court. The majority of
the Judges took the view "that personal liberty' is used in the article as a compendious term to include within itself
all the varieties of rights which go to make up the ‘personal liberties' of man other than those dealt with in the
several clauses ofArticle 19(1).In other words, whileArticle 19(1)deals with particular species or attributes of that
freedom, 'personal liberty' inArticle 21takes in and comprises the residue". The minority judges, however,
disagreed with this view taken by the majority and explained their position in the following words : "No doubt the
expression 'personal liberty' is a comprehensive one and the right to move freely is an attribute of personal liberty. It
is said that the freedom to move freely is carved out of personal liberty and, therefore, the expression 'personal
liberty' inArticle 21excludes that attribute. In our view, this is not a correct approach. Both are independent
fundamental rights, though there is overlapping. There is no question of one being carved out of another. The
fundamental right of life and personal liberty has many attributes and some of them are found inArticle 19.If a
person's fundamental right underArticle 21is infringed, the State can rely upon a law to sustain the action, but that
cannot be a complete answer unless the said law satisfies the testlaid down inArticle 19(2)so far as the attributes
covered byArticle 19(1)are concerned". There can be no doubt that in view of the decision of this Court in R. C.25R.C. Cooper, the minority view (in Kharak Singh) must be regarded

as correct and the majority view must be held to be overruled.

Consequently, it was held that any law which deprives any person

of the liberty guaranteed underArticle 21must not only be just, fair

and reasonable, but must also satisfy that it does not at the same

time violate one or some of the other fundamental rights

enumerated underArticle 19, by demonstrating that the law is

strictly in compliance with one of the corresponding clauses 2 to 6

ofArticle 19.42

26.In Kharak Singh, Ayyangar, J. speaking for the majority held

that the expression ‘personal liberty’ used inArticle 21is a

“compendious term to include within itself all varieties of rights which”Cooper v. Union of India(2) the minority view must be regarded as correct and the majority view must be held to
have been overruled…….

6. …..The law, must, therefore, now be taken to be well settled thatArticle 21does not excludeArticle 19and
that even if there is a law prescribing a procedure for depriving a person of 'personal liberty' and there is
consequently no infringement of the fundamental right conferred byArticle 21, such law, in so far as it abridges or
takes away any fundamental right underArticle 19would have to meet the challenge of that article. This proposition
can no longer be disputed after the decisions in R. C. Cooper's case,Shambhu Nath Sarkar's case and Haradhan
Saha's case. Now, if a law depriving a person of 'personal liberty' and prescribing a procedure for that purpose
within the meaning ofArticle 21has to stand the test of one or more of the fundamental rights conferred
underArticle 19which may be applicable in a given situation, ex hypothesi it must also be liable to be tested with
reference toArticle 14.This was in fact not disputed by the learned Attorney General and indeed he could not do so
in view of the clear and categorical statement made by Mukharjea, J., inA. K. Gopalan's case thatArticle 21
"presupposes that the law is a valid and binding law under the provisions of the Constitution having regard to the
competence of the legislature and the subject it relates to and does not infringe any of the fundamental rights which
the Constitution provides for", includingArticle 14.....26constitute the “personal liberties of a man other than those specified in the

several clauses ofArticle 19(1).”               In other words,Article 19(1)deals with

particular “species or attributes of personal liberty” mentioned in Article

21. “Article 21 takes in and comprises the residue.”                            Such a construction

was not accepted by the minority. The minority opined that bothArticles 19and21are independent fundamental rights but they are

overlapping.43

27. An analysis of Kharak Singh reveals that the minority opined

that the right to move freely is an attribute of personal liberty.

Minority only disputed the correctness of the proposition that by

enumerating certain freedoms inArticle 19(1), the makers of the

Constitution excluded those freedoms from the expression liberty inArticle 21.The minority opined that both the freedoms enumerated

inArticle 19(1)and21are independent fundamental rights, though

there is “overlapping”.

The expression ‘liberty’ is capable of taking within its sweep

not only the right to move freely, guaranteed underArticle 19(1)(d);43No doubt the expression “personal liberty” is a comprehensive one and the right to move freely is an attribute of
personal liberty. It is said that the freedom to move freely is carved out of personal liberty and, therefore, the
expression “personal liberty” inArt. 21excludes that attribute. In our view, this is not a correct approach. Both
are independent fundamental rights, though there is overlapping.27but also each one of the other freedoms mentioned underArticle

19(1).Personal liberty takes within its sweep not only the right not

to be subjected to physical restraints, but also the freedom of

thought, belief, emotion and sensation and a variety of other

freedoms.            The most basic understanding of the expression liberty

is the freedom of an individual to do what he pleases.                 But the idea

of liberty is more complex than that.                         Abraham Lincoln’s

statement44              that our nation “was conceived in liberty” is equally

relevant in the context of the proclamation contained in our

Preamble; and as evocatively expressed in the words of Justice

Brandies;

“Those who won our independence believed that the final end
              of the State was to make men free to develop their faculties;
              and that in its government the deliberative forces should
              prevail over the arbitrary. They valued liberty both as an end
              and as a means. They believed liberty to be the secret of
              happiness and courage to be the secret of liberty.”

                                   – Whitney v. California, 274 U.S. 357, 375

28. The question now arises as to what is the purpose the framers

of the Constitution sought to achieve by specifically enumerating

some of the freedoms which otherwise would form part of the

expression ‘liberty’. To my mind the answer is that the Constituent44Gettysburg Speech28Assembly thought it fit that some aspects of liberty require a more

emphatic declaration so as to restrict the authority of the State to

abridge or curtail them. The need for such an emphatic declaration

arose from the history of this nation. In my opinion, the purpose

sought to be achieved is two-fold. Firstly, to place the expression

‘liberty’ beyond the argumentative process45 of ascertaining the

meaning of the expression liberty, and secondly, to restrict the

authority of the State to abridge those enumerated freedoms only to

achieve the purposes indicated in the corresponding clauses (2) to

(6) ofArticle 19.46It must be remembered that the authority of the45That was exactly the State’s submission in A.K. Gopalan’s case which unfortunately found favour with this Court.46(2) Nothing in sub clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from
making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the
said sub clause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations
with foreign States, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to
an offence
(3) Nothing in sub clause (b) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes,
or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or
public order, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub clause
(4) Nothing in sub clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes,
or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or
public order or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub clause
(5) Nothing in sub clauses (d) and (e) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it
imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of any of the
rights conferred by the said sub clauses either in the interests of the general public or for the protection of the
interests of any Scheduled Tribe
(6) Nothing in sub clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes,
or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonable restrictions on
the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub clause, and, in particular, nothing in the said sub clause shall affect
the operation of any existing law in so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making any law relating to,

(i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any
         occupation, trade or business, or

(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State, of any trade,
         business, industry or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise29State to deprive any person of the fundamental right of liberty is

textually unlimited as the only requirement to enable the State to

achieve that result is to make a ‘law’. When it comes to deprivation

of the freedoms underArticle 19(1), the requirement is: (a) that

there must not only be a law but such law must be tailored to

achieve the purposes indicated in the corresponding sub-Article47;

and (b) to declare that the various facets of liberty enumerated inArticle 19(1)are available only to the citizens of the country but not

all SUBJECTS.48                 As it is now clearly held by this Court that the

rights guaranteed underArticles 14and21are not confined only to

citizens but available even to non-citizens aliens or incorporated

bodies even if they are incorporated in India etc.

29. The inter-relationship ofArticle 19and21, if as understood by

me, as stated in para 28, the authority of the State to deprive any

person of his liberty is circumscribed by certain factors;

(1) It can only be done under the authority of law47That was exactly the State’s submission in A.K. Gopalan’s case which unfortunately found favour with this Court.48SeeHans Muller of Nurenburg Vs. Superintendent, Presidency Jail, Calcutta and OthersAIR 1955 SC 367,
(Paras 34 and 38)
  State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. Vs. The Commercial Tax Officer and Others,AIR 1963 SC 1811, Para 20
  Indo-China Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. Vs. Jasjit Singh, Additional Collector of Customs, Calcutta and Others,AIR 1964 SC 1140, (Para 35)
  Charles Sobraj Vs. Supdt. Central Jail, Tihar, New Delhi,AIR 1978 SC 104, (Para 16 )
  Louis De Raedt Vs. Union of India and Others, (1991) 3 SCC 554, (Para 13)30(2) ‘law’ in the context means a valid legislation.

(3)   If the person whose liberty is sought to be deprived is a

     citizen and that liberty happens to be one of the freedoms

     enumerated inArticle 19(1), such a law is required to be a

     reasonable within the parameters stipulated in clauses (2) to

     (6) ofArticle 19, relevant to the nature of the entrenched

     freedom/s, such law seeks to abridge.

(4)   If the person whose liberty is sought to be deprived of is a

     non-citizen or even if a citizen is with respect to any freedom

     other than those specified inArticles 19(1), the law should be

     just, fair and reasonable.

30. My endeavour qua the aforesaid analysis is only to establish

that the expression liberty inArticle 21is wide enough to take in

not only the various freedoms enumerated inArticle 19(1)but also

many others which are not enumerated.       I am of the opinion that a

better view of the whole scheme of the chapter on fundamental

rights is to look at each one of the guaranteed fundamental rights

not as a series of isolated points, but as a rational continuum of the

legal concept of liberty i.e. freedom from all substantial, arbitrary31encroachments and purposeless restraints sought to be made by

the State. Deprivation of liberty could lead to curtailment of one or

more of freedoms which a human being possesses, but for

interference by the State.

31. Whether it is possible to arrive at a coherent, integrated and

structured statement explaining the right of privacy is a question

that has been troubling scholars and judges in various jurisdictions

for decades.49 Considerable amount of literature both academic and

judicial came into existence.                        In this regard various taxonomies50

have been proposed suggesting that there are a number of interests

and values into which the right to privacy could be dissected.

32. Claims for protection of privacy interests can arise against the

State and its instrumentalities and against non-State entities –

such as, individuals acting in their private capacity and bodies

corporate or unincorporated associations etc., without any element

of State participation.                   Apart from academic literature, different49Gobind v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Another, (1975) 2 SCC 148
     “Para 23. … The most serious advocate of privacy must confess that there are serious problems of defining the
     essence and scope of the right. …”50For a detailed account of the taxonomy of the constitutional right to privacy in India see, Mariyam Kamil, ‘The
Structure of the Right to Privacy in India’ (MPhil thesis, University of Oxford, 2015).32claims based on different asserted privacy interests have also found

judicial support. Cases arose in various jurisdictions in the context

of privacy interests based on (i) Common Law; (ii) statutory

recognition; and (iii) constitutionally protected claims of the right of

privacy.

33. I am of the opinion that for answering the present reference,

this Court is only concerned with the question whether SUBJECTS

who are amenable to the laws of this country have a Fundamental

Right of Privacy against the State51. The text of the Constitution is

silent in this regard. Therefore, it is required to examine whether

such a right is implied in any one or more of the Fundamental

Rights in the text of the Constitution.

34. To answer the above question, it is necessary to understand

conceptually identify the nature of the right to privacy.

35. My learned brothers have discussed various earlier decisions

of this Court and of the Courts of other countries, dealing with the

claims        of     the      Right        of     Privacy.         International             Treaties          and

Conventions have been referred to to establish the existence and51It is a settled principle of law that some of the Fundamental Rights like 14 and 29 are guaranteed even to non-
citizens33recognition of the right to privacy in the various parts of the world,

and have opined that they are to be read into our Constitution in

order to conclude that there exists a Fundamental Right to privacy

under our Constitution. While Justice Nariman opined –

     “94. This reference is answered by stating that the inalienable
     fundamental right to privacy resides inArticle 21and other
     fundamental freedoms contained in Part III of the Constitution of
     India. M.P. Sharma (supra) and the majority in Kharak Singh
     (supra), to the extent that they indicate to the contrary, stand
     overruled. The later judgments of this Court recognizing privacy as
     a fundamental right do not need to be revisited. These cases are,
     therefore, sent back for adjudication on merits to the original
     Bench of 3 honourable Judges of this Court in light of the
     judgment just delivered by us.”

Justice Chandrachud held :

36. One of the earliest cases where the constitutionality of State’s

action allegedly infringing the right of privacy fell for the

consideration of the US Supreme Court is Griswold et al v.

Connecticut, 381 US 479. The Supreme Court of the United States

sustained a claim of a privacy interest on the theory that the

Constitution itself creates certain zones of privacy - ‘repose’ and34‘intimate       decision.52         Building         on this         framework,           Bostwick53

suggested that there are in fact, three aspects of privacy – “repose”,

“sanctuary” and “intimate decision”. “Repose” refers to freedom

from unwarranted stimuli, “sanctuary” to protection against

intrusive observation, and “intimate decision” to autonomy with

respect to the most personal life choices. Whether any other facet

of the right of privacy exists cannot be divined now. In my opinion,

there is no need to resolve all definitional concerns at an abstract

level to understand the nature of the right to privacy. The ever

growing possibilities of technological and psychological intrusions

by the State into the liberty of SUBJECTS must leave some doubt in

this context. Definitional uncertainty is no reason to not recognize

the existence of the right of privacy. For the purpose of this case, it

is sufficient to go by the understanding that the right to privacy

consists of three facets i.e. repose, sanctuary and intimate decision.

Each of these facets is so essential for the liberty of human beings

that I see no reason to doubt that the right to privacy is part of the

liberty guaranteed by our Constitution.

52Griswold v Connecticut 381 US 479 (1965) 487.

Gary Bostwick, ‘A Taxonomy of Privacy: Repose, Sanctuary, and Intimate Decision’ (1976) 64 California Law
Review 1447.

37. History abounds with examples of attempts by governments to

shape the minds of SUBJECTS.                                 In other words, conditioning the

thought process by prescribing what to read or not to read; what

forms of art alone are required to be appreciated leading to the

conditioning of beliefs; interfering with the choice of people

regarding the kind of literature, music or art which an individual

would prefer to enjoy.54 Such conditioning is sought to be achieved

by screening the source of information or prescribing penalties for

making choices which governments do not approve.55                                                  Insofar as

religious beliefs are concerned, a good deal of the misery our

species suffer owes its existence to and centres around competing

claims of the right to propagate religion.                                      Constitution of India

protects the liberty of all SUBJECTS guaranteeing56 the freedom of54Stanley Vs. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557 (1969)       - that the mere private possession of obscene matter cannot
constitutionally be made a crime….

……State has no business telling a man, sitting alone in his own house, what books he may read or what films he
may watch. Our whole constitutional heritage rebels at the thought of giving government the power to control
men’s minds.

(1986) 3 SCC 615, Bijoe Emmanuel & Ors vs State Of Kerala & Others56

25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion.-
(1) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally
entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law-

(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with
religious practice;

(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character
to all classes and sections of Hindus.

Explanation I.- The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be included in the profession of the Sikh
religion.

conscience and right to freely profess, practice and propagate

religion.           While the right to freely “profess, practice and propagate

religion” may be a facet of free speech guaranteed underArticle

19(1)(a), the freedom of the belief or faith in any religion is a matter

of conscience falling within the zone of purely private thought

process and is an aspect of liberty.                                 There are areas other than

religious beliefs which form part of the individual’s freedom of

conscience such as political belief etc. which form part of the liberty

underArticle 21.

38. Concerns of privacy arise when the State seeks to intrude into

the body of SUBJECTS.57                                 Corporeal punishments were not

unknown to India, their abolition is of a recent vintage.                                                   Forced

feeding of certain persons by the State raises concerns of privacy.

An individual’s rights to refuse life prolonging medical treatment or

terminate his life is another freedom which fall within the zone of

the right of privacy. I am conscious of the fact that the issue is

pending before this Court. But in various other jurisdictions, there


Explanation II.- In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference to Hindus shall be construed as including a reference to
persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious institutions shall be
construed accordingly.\57Skinner Vs. Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535 (1942) - There are limits to the extent to which a legislatively represented
majority may conduct biological experiments at the expense of the dignity and personality and natural powers of a
minority – even those who have been guilty of what the majority defines as crimes - Jackson, J.37is a huge debate on those issues though it is still a grey area.58                                              A

woman’s freedom of choice whether to bear a child or abort her

pregnancy are areas which fall in the realm of privacy.

Similarly, the freedom to choose either to work or not and the

freedom to choose the nature of the work are areas of private

decision making process.                          The right to travel freely within the

country or go abroad is an area falling within the right of privacy.

The text of our Constitution recognised the freedom to travel

throughout the country underArticle 19(1)(d).This Court has

already recognised that such a right takes within its sweep the right

to travel abroad.59 A person’s freedom to choose the place of his

residence once again is a part of his right of privacy60 recognised by

the Constitution of India underArticle 19(1)(e)though the pre-

dominant purpose of enumerating the above mentioned two

freedoms inArticle 19(1)is to disable both the federal and State

Governments from creating barriers which are incompatible with

the federal nature of our country and its Constitution.                                        The choice58For the legal debate in this area in US, See Chapter 15.11 of the American Constitutional Law by Laurence H.
Tribe – 2nd Edition.

Maneka Gandhi Vs. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 24860Williams Vs. Fears, 179 U.S. 270 (1900) – Undoubtedly the right of locomotion, the right to remove from one
place to another according to inclination, is an attribute of personal liberty,…….38of appearance and apparel are also aspects of the right of privacy.

The freedom of certain groups of SUBJECTS to determine their

appearance and apparel (such as keeping long hair and wearing a

turban) are protected not as a part of the right of privacy but as a

part of their religious belief.   Such a freedom need not necessarily

be based on religious beliefs falling underArticle 25.Informational

traces are also an area which is the subject matter of huge debate

in various jurisdictions falling within the realm of the right of

privacy, such data is as personal as that of the choice of

appearance and apparel. Telephone tappings and internet hacking

by State, of personal data is another area which falls within the

realm of privacy. The instant reference arises out of such an

attempt by the Union of India to collect bio-metric data regarding all

the residents of this country.

The above-mentioned are some of the areas where some

interest of privacy exists. The examples given above indicate to

some extent the nature and scope of the right of privacy.

40. I do not think that anybody in this country would like to have

the officers of the State intruding into their homes or private

property at will or soldiers quartered in their houses without their39consent. I do not think that anybody would like to be told by the

State as to what they should eat or how they should dress or whom

they should be associated with either in their personal, social or

political life. Freedom of social and political association is

guaranteed to citizens underArticle 19(1)(c).Personal association

is still a doubtful area.61                  The decision making process regarding

the freedom of association, freedoms of travel and residence are

purely private and fall within the realm of the right of privacy. It is

one of the most intimate decisions.

All liberal democracies believe that the State should not have

unqualified authority to intrude into certain aspects of human life

and      that       the      authority         should         be      limited        by     parameters

constitutionally              fixed.       Fundamental                rights        are       the       only

constitutional firewall to prevent State’s interference with those core

freedoms constituting liberty of a human being.                                           The right to

privacy is certainly one of the core freedoms which is to be61The High Court of AP held thatArticle 19(1)(c)would take within its sweep the matrimonial association inT.
Sareetha Vs. T. Venkata Subbaiah, AIR 1983 AP 356.However, this case was later overruled by this Court inSaroj Rani Vs. Sudarshan Kumar Chadha, AIR 1984 SC 156240defended. It is part of liberty within the meaning of that expression

inArticle 21.

41. I am in complete agreement with the conclusions recorded by

my learned brothers in this regard.

42. It goes without saying that no legal right can be absolute.

Every right has limitations.    This aspect of the matter is conceded

at the bar. Therefore, even a fundamental right to privacy has

limitations.     The limitations are to be identified on case to case

basis depending upon the nature of the privacy interest claimed.

There are different standards of review to test infractions of

fundamental rights. While the concept of reasonableness overarches

Part III, it operates differently across Articles (even if only slightly

differently across some of them). Having emphatically interpreted

the Constitution’s liberty guarantee to contain a fundamental right

of privacy, it is necessary for me to outline the manner in which

such a right to privacy can be limited. I only do this to indicate the

direction of the debate as the nature of limitation is not at issue

here.

41

43. To begin with, the options canvassed for limiting the right to

privacy include anArticle 14type reasonableness enquiry62;

limitation as per the express provisions ofArticle 19;a just, fair and

reasonable basis (that is, substantive due process) for limitation perArticle 21;and finally, a just, fair and reasonable standard perArticle 21plus the amorphous standard of ‘compelling state

interest’. The last of these four options is the highest standard of

scrutiny63 that a court can adopt. It is from this menu that a

standard of review for limiting the right of privacy needs to be

chosen.

44. At the very outset, if a privacy claim specifically flows only

from one of the expressly enumerated provisions underArticle 19,

then the standard of review would be as expressly provided underArticle 19.However, the possibility of a privacy claim being entirely

traceable to rights other thanArt. 21is bleak. Without discounting

that possibility, it needs to be noted thatArt. 21is the bedrock of


62A  challenge underArticle 14can be made if there is an unreasonable classification and/or if the impugned
measure is arbitrary. The classification is unreasonable if there is no intelligible differentia justifying the
classification and if the classification has no rational nexus with the objective sought to be achieved. Arbitrariness,
which was first explained at para 85 ofE.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 555, is very simply the
lack of any reasoning.

A tiered level of scrutiny was indicated in what came to be known as the most famous footnote in Constitutional
law that is Footnote Four in United States v. Carolene Products, 304 U.S. 144 (1938). Depending on the graveness
of the right at stake, the court adopts a correspondingly rigorous standard of scrutiny.42the privacy guarantee. If the spirit of liberty permeates every claim

of privacy, it is difficult if not impossible to imagine that any

standard of limitation, other than the one underArticle 21applies.

It is for this reason that I will restrict the available options to the

latter two from the above described four.

45. The just, fair and reasonable standard of review underArticle

21needs no elaboration. It has also most commonly been used in

cases dealing with a privacy claim hitherto.64 Gobind resorted to the

compelling state interest standard in addition to theArticle 21reasonableness enquiry. From the                                 United States where                      the

terminology of ‘compelling state interest’ originated, a strict

standard of scrutiny comprises two things- a ‘compelling state

interest’ and a requirement of ‘narrow tailoring’ (narrow tailoring

means that the law must be narrowly framed to achieve the

objective). As a term, compelling state interest does not have

definite contours in the US. Hence, it is critical that this standard

be adopted with some clarity as to when and in what types of

privacy claims it is to be used. Only in privacy claims which deserve64District Registrar & Collector, Hyderabad v Canara BankAIR 2005 SC 186;State of Maharashtra v Bharat Shanti
Lal Shah(2008) 13 SCC 5.

43the strictest scrutiny is the standard of compelling State interest to

be used. As for others, the just, fair and reasonable standard underArticle 21will apply. When the compelling State interest standard

is to be employed must depend upon the context of concrete cases.

However, this discussion sets the ground rules within which a

limitation for the right of privacy is to be found.

..….....................................J.
                                            (J. CHELAMESWAR)



New Delhi
August 24, 2017.

44REPORTABLE



                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No.494 OF 2012



JUSTICE K S PUTTASWAMY (RETD.) AND ANR.      …. PETITIONERS


                              VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                     …. RESPONDENTS



                               WITH



T.C. (CIVIL) No. 151 OF 2013

T.C. (CIVIL) No. 152 OF 2013

W.P. (CIVIL) No. 833 OF 2013

W.P. (CIVIL) No. 829 OF 2013

W.P. (CIVIL) No. 932 OF 2013

CONMT. PET. (CIVIL) No.144 OF 2014 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012

T.P. (CIVIL) No. 313 OF 2014

T.P. (CIVIL) No. 312 OF 2014

S.L.P. (CRL) No.2524 OF 2014

W.P. (CIVIL) No. 37 OF 2015

W.P. (CIVIL) No. 220 OF 2015

CONMT. PET. (CIVIL) No.674 OF 2015 IN W.P.(C) NO.829/2013

T.P. (CIVIL) No. 921 OF 20151CONMT. PET. (C) No.470 OF 2015 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012

CONMT. PET. (C) No.444 OF 2016 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012

CONMT. PET. (C) No.608 OF 2016 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012W.P.(CIVIL) NO.797/2016CONMT. PET. (CIVIL) No.844 OF 2017 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012

AND

W.P. (CIVIL) No. 342 OF 2017

W.P. (CIVIL) No. 372 OF 2017




                              JUDGMENT


S. A. BOBDE, J.

The Origin of the Reference

1.     This reference calls on us to answer questions that would go to


the very heart of the liberty and freedom protected by the Constitution


of India.   It arises in the context of a constitutional challenge to the


Aadhaar project, which aims to build a database of personal identity and


biometric information covering every Indian – the world’s largest


endeavour of its kind. To the Petitioners’ argument therein that Aadhaar


would violate the right to privacy, the Union of India, through its


Attorney General, raised the objection that Indians could claim no2constitutional right of privacy in view of a unanimous decision of 8


       Judges of this Court inM.P. Sharma v. Satish Chandra1and a decision


       by a majority of 4 Judges inKharak Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh2.

2.       The question, which was framed by a Bench of three of us and


       travels to us from a Bench of five, was the following:

3.       We have had the benefit of submissions from Shri Soli Sorabjee,


     Shri Gopal Subramanium, Shri Shyam Divan, Shri Arvind Datar,


     Shri Anand Grover, Shri Sajan Poovayya, Ms. Meenakshi Arora,


     Shri Kapil Sibal, Shri P.V. Surendranath and Ms. Aishwarya Bhati for the


     Petitioners, and Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for the


     Union of India, Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General


     for the Union, Shri Aryama Sundaram for the State of Maharashtra,


     Shri Rakesh Dwivedi for the State of Gujarat, Shri Arghya Sengupta for


     the State of Haryana, Shri Jugal Kishore for the State of Chattisgarh and


     Shri   Gopal    Sankaranarayanan           for   an   intervenor   supporting     the


     Respondents. We would like to record our appreciation for their able


     assistance in a matter of such great import as the case before us.3Justice KS Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India, W.P. (Civil) No. 494 of 2012, Order dated
11 August 20154The Effect of M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh

4.     The question of whetherArticle 21encompasses a fundamental


right to privacy did not fall for consideration before the 8 Judges in the


M.P. Sharma Court.      Rather, the question was whether an improper


search and seizure operation undertaken against a company and its


directors would violate the constitutional bar against testimonial


compulsion contained inArticle 20(3)of the Constitution. This Court


held that such a search did not violateArticle 20(3).Its reasoning


proceeded on the footing that the absence of a fundamental right to


privacy analogous to the Fourth Amendment to the United States’


constitution in our own constitution suggested that the Constituent


Assembly chose not to subject laws providing for search and seizure to


constitutional limitations. Consequently, this Court had no defensible


ground on which to import such a right intoArticle 20(3), which was, at


any event, a totally different right.

5.     M.P. Sharma is unconvincing not only because it arrived at its


conclusion without enquiry into whether a privacy right could exist in


our Constitution on an independent footing or not, but because it5wrongly took the United States Fourth Amendment – which in itself is no


       more than a limited protection against unlawful surveillance – to be a


       comprehensive constitutional guarantee of privacy in that jurisdiction.

6.      Neither does the 4:2 majority inKharak Singh v. State of Uttar


       Pradesh(supra) furnish a basis for the proposition that no constitutional


       right to privacy exists. Ayyangar, J.’s opinion for the majority found that


       Regulation 236 (b) of the Uttar Pradesh Police Regulations, which inter


       alia enabled the police to make domiciliary visits at night was “plainly


       violative of Article 21”4. In reasoning towards this conclusion, the Court


       impliedly acknowledged a constitutional right to privacy. In particular, it


       began by finding that though India has no like guarantee to the Fourth


       Amendment, “an unauthorised intrusion into a person’s home and the


       disturbance caused to him thereby, is as it were the violation of a


       common law right of a man – an ultimate essential of ordered liberty, if


       not of the very concept of civilization”5. It proceeded to affirm that the


       statement in Semayne’s case6 that “the house of everyone is to him as4Id., at p. 3505Id., at p. 3496(1604) 5 Coke 916his castle and fortress as well as for his defence against injury and


     violence as for his repose” articulated an “abiding principle which


     transcends mere protection of property rights and expounds a concept


     of “personal liberty.” Thus far, the Kharak Singh majority makes out the


     case of the Attorney General. But, in its final conclusion, striking down


     Regulation 236 (b) being violative ofArticle 21could not have been


     arrived at without allowing that a right of privacy was covered by that


     guarantee.

7.      The M.P. Sharma Court did not have the benefit of two


     interpretative devices that have subsequently become indispensable


     tools in this Court’s approach to adjudicating constitutional cases. The


     first of these devices derives from R.C. Cooper v. Union of India7 and its


     progeny – includingManeka Gandhi v. Union of India8– which require


     us to read Part III’s guarantees of rights together.Unlike AK Gopalan v.


     State of Madras9which held the field in M.P. Sharma’s time, rights


     demand to be read as overlapping rather than in silos, so that Part III is


     now conceived as a constellation of harmonious and mutually reinforcing7(1970) 1 SCC 2488(1978) 1 SCC 2489AIR 1950 SC 277guarantees. Part III does not attempt to delineate rights specifically.

I take the right to privacy, an indispensable part of personal liberty, to


       have this character. Such a view would have been wholly untenable in


       the AK Gopalan era.

8.      M.P.     Sharma   also   predates   the   practice   of   the   judicial


       enumeration of rights implicit in a guarantee instantiated in the


       constitutional text. As counsel for the Petitioners correctly submitted,


       there is a whole host of rights that this court has derived fromArticle 21to evidence that enumeration is a well-embedded interpretative practice


       in constitutional law. Article 21’s guarantee to the right to ‘life’ is home


       to such varied rights as the right to go abroad (Maneka Gandhi v. Union


       of India), the right to livelihood (Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal


       Corporation10) and the right to medical care (Paramanand Katara v.


       Union of India11).

9.      Therefore, nothing in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh supports


       the conclusion that there is no fundamental right to privacy in our10(1985) 3 SCC 54511(1989) 4 SCC 2868Constitution. These two decisions and their inconclusiveness on the


       question before the Court today have been discussed in great detail in


       the opinions of Chelameswar J., Nariman J., and Chandrachud J.,


       I agree with their conclusion in this regard. To the extent that stray


       observations taken out of their context may suggest otherwise, the shift


       in our understanding of the nature and location of various fundamental


       rights in Part III brought about by R.C. Cooper and Maneka Gandhi has


       removed the foundations of M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh.

10.     Petitioners submitted that decisions numbering atleast 30 –


       beginning with Mathews, J.’s full-throated acknowledgement of the


       existence and value of a legal concept of privacy inGobind v. State of


       M.P.12– form an unbroken line of cases that affirms the existence of a


       constitutional right to privacy. In view of the foregoing, this view should


       be accepted as correct.

The Form of the Privacy Right

11.      It was argued for the Union by Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned


       Attorney General that the right of privacy may at best be a common law12(1975) 2 SCC 1489right, but not a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution. This


        submission is difficult to accept. In order to properly appreciate the


        argument, an exposition of the first principles concerning the nature and


        evolution of rights is necessary.

12.     According to Salmond, rights are interests protected by ‘rules of


        right’, i.e., by moral or legal rules13. When interests are worth


        protecting on moral grounds, irrespective of the existence of a legal


        system or the operation of law, they are given the name of a natural


        right. Accordingly, Roscoe Pound refers to natural law as a theory of


        moral qualities inherent in human beings, and to natural rights as


        deductions demonstrated by reason from human nature14.             He defines


        natural rights, and distinguishes them from legal rights (whether at


        common law or under constitutions) in the following way:

13.           Legal systems,   which in India as      in England,    began as


       monarchies, concentrated the power of the government in the person of


       the king. English common law, whether it is expressed in the laws of the


       monarch and her Parliament, or in the decisions of the Courts, is the


       source of what the Attorney General correctly takes to be our own


       common law. Semayne’s case16, in which it was affirmed that a man’s


       home is his castle and that even the law may only enter it with warrant,


       clearly shows that elements of the natural right of privacy began to be


       received into the common law as early as in 1604. Where a natural law


       right could not have been enforced at law, the common law right is15Id., at p. 9216(1604) 5 Coke 9111evidently an instrument by which invasions into the valued interest in


     question by one’s fellow man can be addressed. On the very same


     rationale as Seymayne, Chapter 17 of theIndian Penal Code, 1860,


     treats trespass against property as a criminal offence17.

14.     With the advent of democracy and of limited constitutional


     government came the state, a new actor with an unprecedented capacity


     to interfere with natural and common law rights alike. The state differs in


     two material ways from the monarch, the previous site in which


     governmental power (including the power to compel compliance through


     penal laws) was vested. First, the state is an abstract and diffuse entity,


     while the monarch was a tangible, single entity. Second, the advent of


     the state came with a critical transformation in the status of the


     governed from being subjects under the monarch to becoming citizens,17Several other pre-constitutional enactments which codify the common law also
acknowledge a right to privacy, both as between the individuals and the government, as
well as between individuals inter se. These include:

Constitutions like our own are means by which individuals – the


Preambular ‘people of India’ – create ‘the state’, a new entity to serve


their interests and be accountable to them, and transfer a part of their


sovereignty to it. The cumulative effect of both these circumstances is


that individuals governed by constitutions have the new advantage of a


governing entity that draws its power from and is accountable to them,


but they face the new peril of a diffuse and formless entity against whom


existing remedies at common law are no longer efficacious.

15.     Constitutions address the rise of the new political hegemon that


they create by providing for a means by which to guard against its


capacity for invading the liberties available and guaranteed to all civilized


peoples. Under our constitutional scheme, these means – declared to be


fundamental rights – reside in Part III, and are made effective by the


power of this Court and the High Courts underArticles 32and226respectively. This narrative of the progressive expansion of the types of


rights available to individuals seeking to defend their liberties from


invasion – from natural rights to common law rights and finally to13fundamental rights – is consistent with the account of the development


       of rights that important strands in constitutional theory present18.

16.      This court has already recognized the capacity of constitutions to


       be the means by which to declare recognized natural rights as applicable


       qua the state, and of constitutional courts to enforce these declarations.


       In Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala19, Mathew, J. borrows from


       Roscoe Pound to explain this idea in the following terms:

“While   dealing    with    natural      rights, Roscoe
                       Pound states on p. 500 of Vol. I of his Jurisprudence:

Accordingly, in People’sUnion of Civil Liberties v. Union of India20, it has


      recently been affirmed that the objective of Part III is to place citizens at


      centre stage and make the state accountable to them.In Society forUnaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v. Union of India21, it was held that


      “[f]undamental rights have two aspects, firstly, they act as fetter on


      plenary legislative powers, and secondly, they provide conditions for


      fuller development of our people including their individual dignity.”

17.       Once we have arrived at this understanding of the nature of


      fundamental rights, we can dismantle a core assumption of the Union’s


      argument: that a right must either be a common law right or a


      fundamental right. The only material distinctions between the two


      classes of right – of which the nature and content may be the same – lie


      in the incidence of the duty to respect the right and in the forum in which


      a failure to do so can be redressed. Common law rights are horizontal in20(2005) 2 SCC 43621(2012) 6 SCC 1 at 2715their operation when they are violated by one’s fellow man, he can be


named and proceeded against in an ordinary court of law. Constitutional


and fundamental rights, on the other hand, provide remedy against the


violation of a valued interest by the ‘state’, as an abstract entity,


whether through legislation or otherwise, as well as by identifiable public


officials, being individuals clothed with the powers of the state. It is


perfectly possible for an interest to simultaneously be recognized as a


common law right and a fundamental right. Where the interference with


a recognized interest is by the state or any other like entity recognized


byArticle 12, a claim for the violation of a fundamental right would lie.


Where the author of an identical interference is a non-state actor, an


action at common law would lie in an ordinary court.

18.     Privacy has the nature of being both a common law right as well


as a fundamental right. Its content, in both forms, is identical. All that


differs is the incidence of burden and the forum for enforcement for each


form.

16The Content of the Right of Privacy

19.     It might be broadly necessary to determine the nature and


content of privacy in order to consider the extent of its constitutional


protection. As in the case of ‘life’ underArticle 21, a precise definition of


the term ‘privacy’ may not be possible. This difficulty need not detain us.


Definitional and boundary-setting challenges are not unique to the rights


guaranteed inArticle 21.This feature is integral to many core rights,


such as the right to equality. Evidently, the expansive character of any


right central to constitutional democracies like ours has nowhere stood in


the way of recognizing a right and treating it as fundamental where there


are strong constitutional grounds on which to do so.

20.     The existence of zones of privacy is felt instinctively by all


civilized people, without exception. The best evidence for this proposition


lies in the panoply of activities through which we all express claims to


privacy in our daily lives. We lock our doors, clothe our bodies and set


passwords to our computers and phones to signal that we intend for our


places, persons and virtual lives to be private. An early case in the17Supreme Court of Georgia in the United States describes the natural and


       instinctive recognition of the need for privacy in the following terms:

21.      ‘Privacy’ is “[t]he condition or state of being free from public


     attention to intrusion into or interference with one’s acts or decisions”24.


     The right to be in this condition has been described as ‘the right to be let


     alone’25. What seems to be essential to privacy is the power to seclude


     oneself and keep others from intruding it in any way. These intrusions


     may be physical or visual, and may take any of several forms including


     peeping over one’s shoulder to eavesdropping directly or through


     instruments, devices or technological aids.

22.     Every individual is entitled to perform his actions in private. In


     other words, she is entitled to be in a state of repose and to work


     without being disturbed, or otherwise observed or spied upon. The


     entitlement to such a condition is not confined only to intimate spaces


     such as the bedroom or the washroom but goes with a person wherever


     he is, even in a public place. Privacy has a deep affinity with seclusion


     (of our physical persons and things) as well as such ideas as repose,


     solitude, confidentiality and secrecy (in our communications), and24BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY (Bryan Garner, ed.) 3783 (2004)25Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis, The Right To Privacy, 4 HARV. L. REV. 193(1890)19intimacy. But this is not to suggest that solitude is always essential to


       privacy. It is in this sense of an individual’s liberty to do things privately


       that a group of individuals, however large, is entitled to seclude itself


       from others and be private. In fact, a conglomeration of individuals in a


       space to which the rights of admission are reserved – as in a hotel or a


       cinema hall –must be regarded as private. Nor is the right to privacy lost


       when a person moves about in public. The law requires a specific


       authorization for search of a person even where there is suspicion26.


       Privacy must also mean the effective guarantee of a zone of internal


       freedom in which to think. The disconcerting effect of having another


       peer over one’s shoulder while reading or writing explains why


       individuals would choose to retain their privacy even in public. It is


       important to be able to keep one’s work without publishing it in a


       condition which may be described as private. The vigour and vitality of


       the various expressive freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution depends


       on the existence of a corresponding guarantee of cognitive freedom.26Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, s. 4220

23.      Even in the ancient and religious texts of India, a well-developed


       sense of privacy is evident. A woman ought not to be seen by a male


       stranger seems to be a well-established rule in the Ramayana. Grihya


       Sutras prescribe the manner in which one ought to build one’s house in


       order to protect the privacy of its inmates and preserve its sanctity


       during the performance of religious rites, or when studying the Vedas or


       taking meals. The Arthashastra prohibits entry into another’s house,


       without the owner’s consent27. There is still a denomination known as


       the Ramanuj Sampradaya in southern India, members of which continue


       to observe the practice of not eating and drinking in the presence of


       anyone else. Similarly in Islam, peeping into others’ houses is strictly


       prohibited28.    Just as the United States Fourth Amendment guarantees


       privacy in one’s papers and personal effects, the Hadith makes it


       reprehensible to read correspondence between others. In Christianity,


       we find the aspiration to live without interfering in the affairs of others in


       the text of the Bible29. Confession of one’s sins is a private act30.27KAUTILYA’S ARTHASHASTRA189-90 (R. Shamasastri, trans., 1915)28AA MAUDUDI , HUMAN RIGHTS IN ISLAM 27 (1982)29Thessalonians 4:11 THE BIBLE21Religious     and     social     customs   affirming   privacy     also   find


       acknowledgement in our laws, for example, in the Civil Procedure Code’s


       exemption of a pardanashin lady’s appearance in Court31.

24.       Privacy, that is to say, the condition arrived at after excluding


      other persons, is a basic pre-requisite for exercising the liberty and the


      freedom to perform that activity. The inability to create a condition of


      selective seclusion virtually denies an individual the freedom to exercise


      that particular liberty or freedom necessary to do that activity.

25.       It is not possible to truncate or isolate the basic freedom to do


      an activity in seclusion from the freedom to do the activity itself. The


      right to claim a basic condition like privacy in which guaranteed


      fundamental rights can be exercised must itself be regarded as a


      fundamental right. Privacy, thus, constitutes the basic, irreducible


      condition necessary for the exercise of ‘personal liberty’ and freedoms


      guaranteed by the Constitution. It is the inarticulate major premise in


      Part III of the Constitution.

30James 5:16 THE BIBLE31Code of Civil Procedure, 1989, S. 13222Privacy’s Connection to Dignity and Liberty

26.      Undoubtedly, privacy exists, as the foregoing demonstrates, as a


verifiable fact in all civilized societies. But privacy does not stop at being


merely a descriptive claim. It also embodies a normative one. The


normative case for privacy is intuitively simple. Nature has clothed man,


amongst other things, with dignity and liberty so that he may be free to


do what he will consistent with the freedom of another and to develop his


faculties to the fullest measure necessary to live in happiness and peace.


The Constitution, through its Part III, enumerates many of these


freedoms and their corresponding rights as fundamental rights. Privacy is


an essential condition for the exercise of most of these freedoms.


Ex facie, every right which is integral to the constitutional rights to


dignity, life, personal liberty and freedom, as indeed the right to privacy


is, must itself be regarded as a fundamental right.

27.      Though he did not use the name of ‘privacy’, it is clear that it is


what J.S. Mill took to be indispensable to the existence of the general


reservoir of liberty that democracies are expected to reserve to their23citizens. In the introduction to his seminal On Liberty (1859), he


characterized freedom in the following way:

28.     The first and natural home for a right of privacy is inArticle 21at the very heart of ‘personal liberty’ and life itself. Liberty and privacy


     are integrally connected in a way that privacy is often the basic condition


     necessary for exercise of the right of personal liberty. There are


     innumerable activities which are virtually incapable of being performed at


     all and in many cases with dignity unless an individual is left alone or is


     otherwise empowered to ensure his or her privacy. Birth and death are


     events when privacy is required for ensuring dignity amongst all civilized


     people. Privacy is thus one of those rights “instrumentally required if one


     is to enjoy”33 rights specified and enumerated in the constitutional text.32JOHN STUART MILL, ON LIBERTY AND OTHER ESSAYS 15-16 (Stefan Collini ed., 1989) (1859)33Laurence H. Tribe and Michael C. Dorf, Levels Of Generality In The Definition Of Rights,
57 U. CHI . L. REV. 1057 (1990) at 106825

29.       This Court has endorsed the view that ‘life’ must mean


       “something more than mere animal existence”34 on a number of


       occasions, beginning with the Constitution Bench inSunil Batra (I) v.


       Delhi Administration35. Sunil Batra connected this view ofArticle 21to


       the constitutional value of dignity.In numerous cases, includingFrancis


       Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi36, this Court has


       viewed liberty as closely linked to dignity. Their relationship to the effect


       of taking into the protection of ‘life’ the protection of “faculties of


       thinking and feeling”, and of temporary and permanent impairments to


       those faculties. In Francis Coralie Mullin, Bhagwati, J. opined as


       follows37:

Illinois to emphasize the quality of life covered byArticle 21:

30.     It is difficult to   see how dignity        – whose constitutional


significance is acknowledged both by the Preamble and by this Court in


its exposition ofArticle 21, among other rights – can be assured to the27individual without privacy. Both dignity and privacy are intimately


intertwined and are natural conditions for the birth and death of


individuals, and for many significant events in life between these events.


Necessarily, then, the right of privacy is an integral part of both ‘life’ and


‘personal liberty’ underArticle 21, and is intended to enable the rights


bearer to develop her potential to the fullest extent made possible only


in consonance with the constitutional values expressed in the Preamble


as well as across Part III.

Privacy as a Travelling Right

31.     I have already shown that the right of privacy is as inalienable as


the right to perform any constitutionally permissible act. Privacy in all its


aspects constitutes the springboard for the exercise of the freedoms


guaranteed byArticle 19(1).Freedom of speech and expression is always


dependent on the capacity to think, read and write in private and is often


exercised in a state of privacy, to the exclusion of those not intended to


be spoken to or communicated with. A peaceful assembly requires the


exclusion of elements who may not be peaceful or who may have a


different agenda. The freedom to associate must necessarily be the28freedom to associate with those of one’s choice and those with common


objectives. The requirement of privacy in matters concerning residence


and settlement is too well-known to require elaboration. Finally, it is not


possible to conceive of an individual being able to practice a profession


or carry on trade, business or occupation without the right to privacy in


practical terms and without the right and power to keep others away


from his work.

32.     Ex facie, privacy is essential to the exercise of freedom of


conscience and the right to profess, practice and propagate religion videArticle 25.The further right of every religious denomination to maintain


institutions for religious and charitable purposes, to manage its own


affairs and to own and administer property acquired for such purposes


videArticle 26also requires privacy, in the sense of non-interference


from the state.Article 28(3)expressly recognizes the right of a student


attending an educational institution recognized by the state, to be left


alone. Such a student cannot be compelled to take part in any religious


instruction imparted in any such institution unless his guardian has


consented to it.

29

33.     The right of privacy is also integral to the cultural and


educational rights whereby a group having a distinct language, script or


culture shall have the right to conserve the same. It has also always


been an integral part of the right to own property and has been treated


as such in civil law as well as in criminal law vide all the offences and


torts of trespass known to law.

34.     Therefore, privacy is the necessary condition precedent to the


enjoyment of any of the guarantees in Part III. As a result, when it is


claimed by rights bearers before constitutional courts, a right to privacy


may be situated not only inArticle 21, but also simultaneously in any of


the other guarantees in Part III. In the current state of things,Articles


19(1), 20(3), 25, 28and29are all rights helped up and made


meaningful by the exercise of privacy. This is not an exhaustive list.


Future developments in technology and social ordering may well reveal


that there are yet more constitutional sites in which a privacy right


inheres that are not at present evident to us.

30Judicial Enumeration of the Fundamental Right to Privacy

35.      There is nothing unusual in the judicial enumeration of one right


       on the basis of another under the Constitution. In the case of Article 21’s


       guarantee of ‘personal liberty’, this practice is only natural if Salmond’s


       formulation of liberty as “incipient rights”38 is correct. By the process of


       enumeration, constitutional courts merely give a name and specify the


       core of guarantees already present in the residue of constitutional


       liberty. Over time, the Supreme Court has been able to imply by its


       interpretative process, that several fundamental rights including the right


       to privacy emerge out of expressly stated Fundamental Rights.InUnni


       Krishnan, J.P. v. State of A.P.39, a Constitution Bench of this Court held


       that “several unenumerated rights fall withinArticle 21since personal


       liberty is of widest amplitude”40 on the way to affirming the existence of


       a right to education. It went on to supply the following indicative list of


       such rights, which included the right to privacy:

3. The right against solitary confinement.Sunil Batra
                  v. Delhi Administration, (1978) 4 SCC 494 at 545.

4. The right against bar fetters.Charles Sobhraj v.
                  Supdt. (Central Jail0, (1978)4 SCR 104

5. The right to legal aid.MH Hoskot v. State of
                  Maharashtra, (1978) 3 SCC 544.

6. The right to speedy trial. Hussainara Khatoon v.

Home Secy, State of Bihar, (1980)1 SCC81

7. The right against hand cuffing. Prem Shankar v.

Delhi Administration (1980) 3 SCC 526

8. The right against delayed execution. TV
                  Vatheeswaran v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1983) 2 SCC68.

9. The right against custodial violence.Sheela Barse v.
                  State of Maharashtra, (1983) 2 SCC 96.

10. The Right against public hanging. A.G. of India v.
                  Lachmadevi, (1989) Supp. 1 SCC264

11. Doctor’s Assistance. Paramananda            Katra v.

Union of India, (1989) 4 SCC 286.

12. Shelter.Santistar Builder v. N.KI. Totame,
                  (1990) 1 SCC 520”


     In the case of privacy, the case for judicial enumeration is especially


     strong. It is no doubt a fair implication fromArticle 21, but also more.


     Privacy is be a right or condition, “logically presupposed”41 by rights


     expressly recorded in the constitutional text, if they are to make sense.41Laurence H. Tribe And Michael C. Dorf, Levels Of Generality In The Definition Of
Rights, 57 U. CHI. L. REV. 1057 (1990) at p. 106832As a result, privacy is more than merely a derivative constitutional right.


It is the necessary and unavoidable logical entailment of rights


guaranteed in the text of the constitution.

36.     Not recognizing character of privacy as a fundamental right is


likely to erode the very sub-stratum of the personal liberty guaranteed


by the constitution. The decided cases clearly demonstrate that


particular fundamental rights could not have been exercised without the


recognition of the right of privacy as a fundamental right. Any


derecognition or diminution in the importance of the right of privacy will


weaken the fundamental rights which have been expressly conferred.

37.     Before proceeding to the question of how constitutional courts


are to review whether a violation of privacy is unconstitutional, three


arguments from the Union and the states deserve to be dealt with


expressly.

38.     The Learned Attorney General relied on cases holding that there


is no fundamental right to trade in liquor to submit by analogy that there


can be no absolute right to privacy. Apprehensions that the recognition


of privacy would create complications for the state in its exercise of33powers is not well-founded. The declaration of a right cannot be avoided


where there is good constitutional ground for doing so. It is only after


acknowledging that the right of privacy is a fundamental right, that we


can consider how it affects the plenary powers of the state. In any event,


the state can always legislate a reasonable restriction to protect and


effectuate a compelling state interest, like it may while restricting any


other fundamental right. There is no warrant for the assumption or for


the conclusion that the fundamental right to privacy is an absolute right


which cannot be reasonably restricted given a sufficiently compelling


state interest.

39.     Learned Additional Solicitor General, Shri Tushar Mehta listed


innumerable statutes which protect the right of privacy wherever


necessary and urged that it is neither necessary nor appropriate to


recognize privacy as a fundamental right. This argument cannot be


accepted any more in the context of a fundamental right to privacy than


in the context of any other fundamental right. Several legislations


protect and advance fundamental rights, but their existence does not


make the existence of a corresponding fundamental right redundant.34This is obviously so because legislations are alterable and even


repealable unlike fundamental rights, which, by design, endure.

40.     Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, appearing for the State of Gujarat, while


referring to several judgments of the Supreme Court of the United


States, submitted that only those privacy claims which involve a


‘reasonable expectation of privacy’ be recognized as protected by the


fundamental right.   It is not necessary for the purpose of this case to


deal with the particular instances of privacy claims which are to be


recognized as implicating a fundamental right. Indeed, it would be


premature to do. The scope and ambit of a constitutional protection of


privacy can only be revealed to us on a case-by-case basis.


The Test for Privacy

41.     One way of determining what a core constitutional idea is, could


be by considering its opposite, which shows what it is not. Accordingly,


we understand justice as the absence of injustice, and freedom as the


absence of restraint. So too privacy may be understood as the antonym


of publicity. In law, the distinction between what is considered a private


trust as opposed to a public trust illuminates what I take to be core and35irreducible attributes of privacy.InDeoki Nandan v. Murlidhar42, four


      judges of this Court articulated the distinction in the following terms:

42.      Privacy is always connected, whether directly or through its


      effect on the actions which are sought to be secured from interference,


      to the act of associating with others. In this sense, privacy is usually best


      understood as a relational right, even as its content frequently concerns


      the exclusion of others from one’s society.

43.      The trusts illustration also offers us a workable test for


      determining when a constitutionally cognizable privacy claim has been


      made, and the basis for acknowledging that the existence of such a claim42(1956) SCR 75636is context-dependent. To exercise one’s right to privacy is to choose and


specify on two levels. It is to choose which of the various activities that


are taken in by the general residue of liberty available to her she would


like to perform, and to specify whom to include in one’s circle when


performing them. It is also autonomy in the negative, and takes in the


choice and specification of which activities not to perform and which


persons to exclude from one’s circle. Exercising privacy is the signaling


of one’s intent to these specified others – whether they are one’s co-


participants or simply one’s audience – as well as to society at large, to


claim and exercise the right. To check for the existence of an actionable


claim to privacy, all that needs to be considered is if such an intent to


choose and specify exists, whether directly in its manifestation in the


rights bearer’s actions, or otherwise.

44.     Such a formulation would exclude three recurring red herrings in


the Respondents’ arguments before us. Firstly, it would not admit of


arguments that privacy is limited to property or places. So, for example,


taking one or more persons aside to converse at a whisper even in a


public place would clearly signal a claim to privacy, just as broadcasting37one’s words by a loudspeaker would signal the opposite intent. Secondly,


this formulation would not reduce privacy to solitude. Reserving the


rights to admission at a large gathering place, such as a cinema hall or


club, would signal a claim to privacy. Finally, neither would such a


formulation require us to hold that private information must be


information that is inaccessible to all others.

Standards of Review of Privacy Violations

45.     There is no doubt that privacy is integral to the several


fundamental rights recognized by Part III of the Constitution and must


be regarded as a fundamental right itself. The relationship between the


right of privacy and the particular fundamental right (or rights) involved


would depend on the action interdicted by a particular law. At a


minimum, since privacy is always integrated with personal liberty, the


constitutionality of the law which is alleged to have invaded into a rights


bearer’s privacy must be tested by the same standards by which a law


which invades personal liberty underArticle 21is liable to be tested.


UnderArticle 21, the standard test at present is the rationality review


expressed in Maneka Gandhi’s case. This requires that any procedure by38which the state interferes with anArticle 21right to be “fair, just and


       reasonable, not fanciful, oppressive or arbitrary”43.

46.      Once it is established that privacy imbues every constitutional


       freedom with its efficacy and that it can be located in each of them, it


       must follow that interference with it by the state must be tested against


       whichever one or more Part III guarantees whose enjoyment is curtailed.


       As a result, privacy violations will usually have to answer to tests in


       addition to the one applicable toArticle 21.Such a view would be wholly


       consistent with R.C. Cooper v. Union of India.

Conclusion

47.      In view of the foregoing, I answer the reference before us in the


       following terms:

Judge Bench and the 6-Judge Bench decisions have ceased to

be relevant in the context of the vastly changed circumstances

of today. Further, according to him, State action that violates

the fundamental right to privacy must contain at least four

elements, namely:

5.    Shri P.V. Surendra Nath, appearing on behalf of the State

of Kerala, also supported the petitioners and stated that the

constitutional right to privacy very much exists in Part III of the

Constitution.

6.    Appearing on behalf of the Union of India, Shri K.K.

Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India, has argued that

the conclusions arrived at in the 8-Judge Bench and the 6-

Judge Bench decisions should not be disturbed as they are

supported by the fact that the founding fathers expressly

rejected the right to privacy being made part of the fundamental

rights chapter of the Constitution. He referred in copious detail

to the Constituent Assembly debates for this purpose. Further,

according to him, privacy is a common law right and all aspects

of privacy do not elevate themselves into being a fundamental

right. If at all, the right to privacy can only be one amongst7several varied rights falling under the umbrella of the right to

personal liberty. According to him, the right to life stands above

the right to personal liberty, and any claim to privacy which

would destroy or erode this basic foundational right can never

be elevated to the status of a fundamental right.        He also

argued that the right to privacy cannot be claimed when most of

the aspects which are sought to be protected by such right are

already in the public domain and the information in question

has already been parted with by citizens.

7.   Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General of

India, appearing for UIDAI and the State of Madhya Pradesh,

generally supported and adopted the arguments of the learned

Attorney General. According to him, privacy is an inherently

vague and subjective concept and cannot, therefore, be

accorded the status of a fundamental right. Further, codified

statutory law in India already confers protection to the

individual’s right to privacy.   According to him, no further

expansion of the rights contained in Part III of our Constitution

is at all warranted. Also, the position under English Law is that

there is no common law right to privacy. He cited before us8examples of other countries in the world where privacy is

protected by legislation and not by or under the Constitution.

8.     Shri Aryama Sundaram, appearing for the State of

Maharashtra, also supported the arguments made by the

learned Attorney General.        According to him, there is no

separate “privacy” right and violation of a fundamental right

should directly be traceable to rights expressly protected by

Part III of the Constitution. Further, privacy is a vague and

inchoate expression.       He also referred to the Constituent

Assembly debates to buttress the same proposition that the

right to privacy was expressly discountenanced by the framers

of the Constitution.    He went on to state that “personal liberty”

inArticle 21is liberty which is circumscribed – i.e. it relates only

to the person of the individual and is smaller conceptually than

“civil liberty”.   According to him, the ratio of Kharak Singh

(supra) is that there is no fundamental right to privacy, but any

fundamental right that is basic to ordered liberty would certainly

be included as a fundamental right.According to him,Gobind

v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1975) 2 SCC 148, did not state

that there was any fundamental right to privacy and the later9judgments which referred only toGobind(supra) as laying

down such a right are incorrect for this reason.

9.   Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned senior counsel appearing

for the State of Gujarat, has argued that both the petitioners as

well as the learned Attorney General have taken extreme

positions. According to him, the petitioners state that in the

case of every invasion of a privacy right, howsoever trivial, the

fundamental right to privacy gets attracted, whereas according

to the learned Attorney General, there is no fundamental right

to privacy at all. He asked us to adopt an intermediate position

– namely, that it is only if the U.S. Supreme Court’s standard

that a petitioner before a Court satisfies the test of “reasonable

expectation of privacy” that such infraction of privacy can be

elevated to the level of a fundamental right. According to Shri

Dwivedi, individual personal choices made by an individual are

already protected underArticle 21under the rubric “personal

liberty”. It is only when individuals disclose certain personal

information in order to avail a benefit that it could be said that

they have no reasonable expectation of privacy as they have

voluntarily and freely parted with such information. Also,10according to him, it is only specialized data, if parted with,

which would require protection. As an example, he stated that

a person’s name and mobile number, already being in the

public domain, would not be reasonably expected by that

person to be something private. On the other hand, what is

contained in that person’s bank account could perhaps be

stated to be information over which he expects a reasonable

expectation of privacy and would, if divulged by the bank to

others, constitute an infraction of his fundamental right to

privacy. According to him:

(ii)    Does the claim relate to private or family life,
             or a confidential relationship.

(iii)   Is the claim serious one or is it trivial.

(iv)    Is the disclosure likely to result in any serious
             or significant injury and the nature and the
             extent of disclosure.

(v)     Is disclosure for identification purpose or
             relates to personal and sensitive information
             of an identified person.

(vi)    Does disclosure relate to information already
              disclosed publicly to third parties or several
              parties willingly and unconditionally. Is the
              disclosure in the course of e commerce or
              social media?

Assuming, that in a case that it is found that a claim
      for privacy is protected byArticle 21of the
      Constitution, the test should be following:-

(iii)   the legislation should be reasonable and have
              nexus with the public interest.

(iv)    the State would be entitled to adopt that
              measure which would most efficiently achieve
              the objective without being excessive.

(v)     if apart fromArticle 21, the legislation infringes
              any other specified Fundamental Right then it
              must stand the test in relation to that specified
              Fundamental Right.

(vi)    Presumption of validity would attach to the
              legislations.”

10.   Shri A. Sengupta, appearing on behalf of the State of

Haryana, has supported the arguments of the learned Attorney

General and has gone on to state that even the U.S. Supreme

Court no longer uses the right to privacy to test laws that were

earlier tested on this ground. Any right to privacy is12conceptually unsound, and only comprehensive data protection

legislation can effectively address concerns of data protection

and privacy. The Government of India is indeed alive to the

need for such a law. He further argued that privacy as a

concept is always marshaled to protect liberty and, therefore,

argued that the formulation that should be made by this Court is

whether a liberty interest is at all affected; is such liberty

“personal liberty” or other liberty that deserves constitutional

protection and is there a countervailing legitimate State interest.

11.   Shri Jugal Kishore, appearing on behalf of the State of

Chhattisgarh, has also broadly supported the stand of the

learned Attorney General.

12.   Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan, appearing on behalf of the

Centre for Civil Society, argued that M.P. Sharma (supra) and

Kharak Singh (supra) are correctly decided and must be

followed as there has been no change in the constitutional

context of privacy fromGopalan(supra) through R.C. Cooper

(supra) and Maneka Gandhi (supra). He further argued that

being incapable of precise definition, privacy ought not to be13elevated in all its aspects to the level of a fundamental right.

According to him, the words “life” and “personal liberty” inArticle 21have already been widely interpreted to include many

facets of what the petitioners refer to as privacy. Those facets

which have statutory protection are not protected byArticle 21.He also argued that we must never forget that when

recognizing aspects of the right to privacy as a fundamental

right, such aspects cannot be waived and this being the case, a

privacy interest ought not to be raised to the level of a

fundamental right. He also cautioned us against importing

approaches from overseas out of context.

Early Views on Privacy

13.   Any discussion with regard to a right of privacy of the

individual must necessarily begin with Semayne’s case, 77 ER

194. This case was decided in the year 1603, when there was a

change of guard in England. The Tudor dynasty ended with the

death of Elizabeth I, and the Stuart dynasty, a dynasty which

hailed from Scotland took over under James VI of Scotland,14who became James I of England.1 James I was an absolute

        monarch who ruled believing that he did so by Divine Right.

        Semayne’s case (supra) was decided in this historical setting.

14.      The importance of Semayne’s case (supra) is that it

        decided that every man’s home is his castle and fortress for his

        defence against injury and violence, as well as for his repose.

        William Pitt, the Elder, put it thus: “The poorest man may in his

        cottage bid defiance to all the force of the Crown. It may be frail

        — its roof may shake — the wind may blow through it — the

        storm may enter, the rain may enter — but the King of England

        cannot enter — all his force dare not cross the threshold of the

        ruined tenement.” A century and a half later, pretty much the

        same thing was said in Huckle v. Money, 95 ER 768 (1763), in

        which it was held that Magistrates cannot exercise arbitrary

        powers which violated the Magna Carta (signed by King John,

        conceding certain rights to his barons in 1215), and if they did,

        exemplary damages must be given for the same. It was stated1It is interesting to note that from 1066 onwards, England has never been ruled by a native Anglo-Saxon. The
Norman French dynasty which gave way to the Plantagenet dynasty ruled from 1066-1485; the Welsh Tudor
dynasty then ruled from 1485-1603 AD; the Stuart dynasty, a Scottish dynasty, then ruled from 1603; and barring a
minor hiccup in the form of Oliver Cromwell, ruled up to 1714. From 1714 onwards, members of a German dynasty
from Hanover have been monarchs of England and continue to be monarchs in England.15that, “To enter a man’s house by virtue of a nameless warrant,

in order to procure evidence is worse than the Spanish

Inquisition, a law under which no Englishman would wish to live

an hour.”

15.   This statement of the law was echoed in Entick v.

Carrington, 95 ER 807 (1765), in which Lord Camden held that

an illegal search warrant was “subversive of all the comforts of

society” and the issuance of such a warrant for the seizure of all

of a man’s papers, and not only those alleged to be criminal in

nature, was “contrary to the genius of the law of England.” A

few years later, in Da Costa v. Jones, 98 ER 1331 (1778), Lord

Mansfield upheld the privacy of a third person when such

privacy was the subject matter of a wager, which was injurious

to the reputation of such third person. The wager in that case

was as to whether a certain Chevalier D’eon was a cheat and

imposter in that he was actually a woman. Such wager which

violated the privacy of a third person was held to be injurious to

the reputation of the third person for which damages were

awarded to the third person. These early judgments did much

to uphold the inviolability of the person of a citizen.16

16.   When we cross the Atlantic Ocean and go to the United

States, we find a very interesting article printed in the Harvard

Law Review in 1890 by Samuel D. Warren and Louis D.

Brandeis [(4 Harv. L. Rev. 193)]. The opening paragraph of the

said article is worth quoting:

17.   This article is of great importance for the reason that it

spoke of the right of the individual “to be let alone”. It stated in

unmistakable terms that this right is not grounded as a property17right, but is grounded in having the right of an “inviolate

personality”. Limitations on this right were also discussed in

some detail, and remedies for the invasion of this right of

privacy were suggested, being an action of tort for damages in

all cases and perhaps an injunction in some. The right of

privacy as expounded in this article did not explore the

ramifications of the said right as against State action, but only

explored invasions of this right by private persons.


Three Great Dissents

18.   When the Constitution of India was framed, the

fundamental rights chapter consisted of rights essentially of

citizens and persons against the State.Article 21, with which

we are directly concerned, was couched in negative form in

order to interdict State action that fell afoul of its contours. This

Article, which houses two great human rights, the right to life

and the right to personal liberty, was construed rather narrowly

by the early Supreme Court of India. But then, there were

Judges who had vision and dissented from their colleagues.

This judgment will refer to three great dissents by Justices Fazl

Ali, Subba Rao and Khanna.

19.      Charles Evans Hughes, before he became the Chief

           Justice of the United States and while he was still a member of

           the New York Court of Appeals, delivered a set of six lectures

           at Columbia University.2 The famous passage oft quoted in

           many judgments comes from his second lecture. In words that

           resonate even today, he stated:

20.      Brandeis, J. had a somewhat different view. He cautioned

           that “in most matters it is more important that the applicable rule

           of law be settled than that it be settled right.” [See Burnet v.

           Coronado Oil & Gas Co., 285 U.S. 393 at 406 (1932)]. John

           P. Frank wrote, in 1958, of the Brandeis view as follows:

21.      Whichever way one looks at it, the foresight of Fazl Ali, J.

           inA.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 88, simply

           takes our breath away. The subject matter of challenge in the

           said case was the validity of certain provisions of thePreventive

           Detention Actof 1950. In a judgment which anticipated the

           changes made in our constitutional law twenty years later, this

           great Judge said:

He went on thereafter to hold that the fact that “due process”

was not actually used inArticle 21would be of no moment. He

said:

22.Insofar as the other part of Fazl Ali, J.’s judgment is

        concerned, that “due process” was an elastic enough

        expression to comprehend substantive due process, a recent

        judgment inMohd. Arif v. Registrar, Supreme Court of India

        & Ors., (2014) 9 SCC 737, by a Constitution Bench of this

        Court, has held:-

283-84, para 6)26“6…In      Sunil     Batra   v.     Delhi
                           Administration, (1978) 4 SCC 494, while
                           dealing with the question as to whether
                           a person awaiting death sentence can
                           be kept in solitary confinement, Krishna
                           Iyer J. said that though our Constitution
                           did not have a “due process” clause as
                           in the American Constitution; the same
                           consequence ensued after the decisions
                           in theBank Nationalisationcase (1970)
                           1 SCC 248, and Maneka Gandhicase
                           (1978) 1 SCC 248.…

                           In Bachan Singh (Bachan Singh v. State
                           of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684) which
                           upheld the constitutional validity of the
                           death penalty, Sarkaria J., speaking for
                           the majority, said that ifArticle 21is
                           understood in accordance with the
                           interpretation put upon it in Maneka
                           Gandhi, it will read to say that: (SCC
                           p.730, para 136)

                               “136. No person shall be deprived
                               of his life or personal liberty except
                               according to fair, just and
                               reasonable procedure established
                               by valid law.”

                  The wheel has turned full circle.Substantive due
                  process is now to be applied to the fundamental
                  right to life and liberty.”55Shri Rakesh Dwivedi has argued before us that in Maneka Gandhi (supra), Chandrachud, J. had, in paragraph 55
of the judgment, clearly stated that substantive due process is no part of the Constitution of India.He further
argued that Krishna Iyer, J.’s statement inSunil Batra(supra) that a due process clause as contained in the U.S.
Constitution is now to be read intoArticle 21, is a standalone statement of the law and that “substantive due
process” is an expression which brings in its wake concepts which do not fit into the Constitution of India.It is not
possible to accept this contention for the reason that in the Constitution Bench decision in Mithu (supra),
Chandrachud, C.J., did not refer to his concurring judgment in Maneka Gandhi (supra), but instead referred, with
approval, to Krishna Iyer, J.’s statement of the law in paragraph 6.It is this statement that is reproduced in
paragraph 28 ofMohd. Arif(supra). Also, “substantive due process” in our context only means that a law can be27(at pages 755-756)

23.      The second great dissent, which is of Subba Rao, J., in

        Kharak Singh (supra), has a direct bearing on the question to

        be decided by us.6 In this judgment, Regulation 237 of the U.P.

        Police Regulations was challenged as violating fundamental



struck down underArticle 21if it is not fair, just or reasonable on substantive and not merely procedural grounds.
In any event, it is Chandrachud,C.J’s earlier view that is a standalone view.InCollector of Customs, Madras v.
Nathella Sampathu Chetty, (1962) 3 SCR 786 at 816, a Constitution Bench of this Court, when asked to apply
certain American decisions, stated the following:

24.   All 6 Judges struck down sub-para (b), but Subba Rao, J.

joined by Shah, J., struck down the entire Regulation as

violating the individual’s right to privacy in the following words:

25.   This takes us to the correctness of the aforesaid view,

firstly in light of the decision of the 8-Judge Bench in M.P.

Sharma (supra). The facts of that case disclose that certain

searches were made as a result of which a voluminous mass of

records was seized from various places. The petitioners prayed30that the search warrants which allowed such searches and

seizures to take place be quashed, based on an argument

founded onArticle 20(3)of the Constitution which says that no

person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a

witness against himself. The argument which was turned down

by the Court was that since this kind of search would lead to the

discovery of several incriminating documents, a person

accused of an offence would be compelled to be a witness

against himself as such documents would incriminate him. This

argument was turned down with reference to the law of

testimonial compulsion in the U.S., the U.K. and in this country.

While dealing with the argument, this Court noticed that there is

nothing in our Constitution corresponding to the Fourth

Amendment     of   the   U.S.   Constitution,   which   interdicts

unreasonable searches and seizures. In so holding, this Court

then observed:

26.   The first thing that strikes one on reading the aforesaid

passage is that the Court resisted the invitation to read the U.S.

Fourth Amendment into the U.S. Fifth Amendment; in short it

refused to read or import the Fourth Amendment into the Indian

equivalent of that part of the Fifth Amendment which is the

same asArticle 20(3)of the Constitution of India. Also, the

fundamental right to privacy, stated to be analogous to the

Fourth Amendment, was held to be something which could not

be read intoArticle 20(3).

27.   The second interesting thing to be noted about these

observations is that there is no broad ratio in the said judgment

that a fundamental right to privacy is not available in Part III of

the Constitution. The observation is confined toArticle 20(3).Further, it is clear that the actual finding in the aforesaid case

had to do with the law which had developed in this Court as

well as the U.S. and the U.K. onArticle 20(3)which, on the

facts of the case, was held not to be violated.Also we must not

forget that this was an early judgment of the Court, delivered in

theGopalan(supra) era, which did not have the benefit of R.C.

Cooper (supra) or Maneka Gandhi (supra). Quite apart from

this, it is clear that by the time this judgment was delivered,

India was already a signatory to the Universal Declaration of

Human Rights,Article 12of which states:

28.   It has always been the law of this Court that international

treaties must be respected. Our Constitution contains Directive

Principle 51(c), which reads as under:

29.   Observations of several judgments make it clear that in

the absence of any specific prohibition in municipal law,

international law forms part of Indian law and consequently

must be read into or as part of our fundamental rights. (For this

proposition, see: Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2

SCC 684 at paragraph 139, Francis Coralie Mullin v.

Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi & Ors., (1981) 1 SCC

608 at paragraph 8,Vishaka & Ors. v. State of Rajasthan &

Ors., (1997) 6 SCC 241 at paragraph 7 andNational Legal

Services Authority v. Union of India, (2014) 5 SCC 438 at35paragraphs 51-60). This last judgment is instructive in that it

refers to international treaties and covenants, the Constitution,

and various earlier judgments. The conclusion in paragraph 60

is as follows:

Section 2(1)(d)and (f) are important, and read as follows:

Canara Bank etc., (2005) 1 SCC 496 at 516, where this Court

held:

given the fact that it was delivered in an era when fundamental

rights had to be read disjunctively in watertight compartments;

and given the fact thatArticle 21as we know it today only

sprung into life in the post Maneka Gandhi (supra) era, we are

of the view that this judgment is completely out of harm’s way

insofar as the grounding of the right to privacy in the

fundamental rights chapter is concerned.

37.   We now come to the majority judgment of 4 learned

Judges in Kharak Singh (supra). When examining sub-clause

(b) of Regulation 236, which endorsed domiciliary visits at night,

even the majority had no hesitation in striking down the

aforesaid provision. This Court said that “life” used inArticle 21must mean something more than mere animal existence and

“liberty” something more than mere freedom from physical

restraint. This was after quoting the judgment of Field, J. in

Munn v. Illinois, 94 U.S. 113 (1876).The majority judgment,

after quoting fromGopalan(supra), then went on to hold thatArticle 19(1)andArticle 21are to be read separately, and so44read held thatArticle 19(1)deals with particular species or

         attributes of personal liberty, whereasArticle 21takes in and

         comprises the residue.7

38.      This part of the judgment has been expressly overruled

         by R.C. Cooper (supra) as recognized by Bhagwati, J. in

         Maneka Gandhi (supra):

39.   The majority judgment in Kharak Singh (supra) then

went on to refer to the Preamble to the Constitution, and stated

thatArticle 21contained the cherished human value of dignity

of the individual as the means of ensuring his full development

and evolution. A passage was then quoted from Wolf v.

Colorado, 338 U.S. 25 (1949)to the effect that the security of

one’s privacy against arbitrary intrusion by the police is basic to

a free society. The Court then went on to quote the U.S. Fourth

Amendment which guarantees the rights of the people to be

secured in their persons, houses, papers and effects against

unreasonable searches and seizures. Though the Indian

Constitution did not expressly confer a like guarantee, the

majority held that nonetheless an unauthorized intrusion into a

person’s home would violate the English Common Law maxim

which asserts that every man’s house is his castle. In this view

ofArticle 21, Regulation 236(b) was struck down.

40.   However, while upholding sub-clauses (c), (d) and (e) of

Regulation 236, the Court stated (at page 351):

47

41.   Peculiarly enough, without referring to the extracted

passage in which the majority held that the right to privacy is

not a guaranteed right under our Constitution, the majority

judgment has been held as recognizing a fundamental right to

privacy inArticle 21.(See:PUCL v. Union of India, (1997) 1

SCC 301 at paragraph 14;Mr. ‘X’ v. Hospital ‘Z’, (1998) 8

SCC 296 at paragraphs 21 and 22;District Registrar and48Collector, Hyderabad & Anr. v. Canara Bank, etc., (2005) 1

SCC 496 at paragraph 36; and Thalappalam Service Co-

operativeBank Limited & Ors. v. State of Kerala & Ors.,

(2013) 16 SCC 82 at paragraph 57).

42.   If the passage in the judgment dealing with domiciliary

visits at night and striking it down is contrasted with the later

passage upholding the other clauses of Regulation 236

extracted above, it becomes clear that it cannot be said with

any degree of clarity that the majority judgment upholds the

right to privacy as being contained in the fundamental rights

chapter or otherwise.      As the majority judgment contradicts

itself on this vital aspect, it would be correct to say that it cannot

be given much value as a binding precedent. In any case, we

are of the view that the majority judgment is good law when it

speaks ofArticle 21being designed to assure the dignity of the

individual as a most cherished human value which ensures the

means of full development and evolution of a human being.

The majority judgment is also correct in pointing out thatArticle

21interdicts unauthorized intrusion into a person’s home.

Where the majority judgment goes wrong is in holding that49fundamental rights are in watertight compartments and in

holding that the right of privacy is not a guaranteed right under

our Constitution. It can be seen, therefore, that the majority

judgment is like the proverbial curate’s egg – good only in parts.

Strangely enough when the good parts alone are seen, there is

no real difference between Subba Rao, J.’s approach in the

dissenting judgment and the majority judgment.           This then

answers the major part of the reference to this 9-Judge Bench

in that we hereby declare that neither the 8-Judge nor the 6-

Judge Bench can be read to come in the way of reading the

fundamental right to privacy into Part III of the Constitution.

43.      However, the learned Attorney General has argued in

support of the 8-Judge Bench and the 6-Judge Bench, stating

that the framers of the Constitution expressly rejected the right

to privacy being made part of the fundament rights chapter of

the Constitution. While he may be right, Constituent Assembly

debates make interesting reading only to show us what exactly

the framers had in mind when they framed the Constitution of

India.     As will be pointed out later in this judgment, our

judgments expressly recognize that the Constitution governs50the lives of 125 crore citizens of this country and must be

interpreted to respond to the changing needs of society at

different points in time.

44.   The phrase “due process” was distinctly avoided by the

framers of the Constitution and replaced by the colourless

expression “procedure established by law”. Despite this, owing

to changed circumstances, Maneka Gandhi (supra) in 1978,

followed by a number of judgments, have read what was

expressly rejected by the framers intoArticle 21, so that by the

time ofMohd. Arif(supra), this Court, at paragraph 28, was

able to say that the wheel has turned full circle and substantive

due process is now part and parcel ofArticle 21.Given the

technological revolution of the later part of the 20th century and

the completely altered lives that almost every citizen of this

country leads, thanks to this revolution, the right to privacy has

to be judged in today’s context and not yesterday’s.          This

argument, therefore, need not detain us.

45.   The learned Attorney General then argued that between

the right to life and the right to personal liberty, the former has51primacy and any claim to privacy which would destroy or erode

this basic foundational right can never be elevated to the status

of a fundamental right. Elaborating further, he stated that in a

developing country where millions of people are denied the

basic necessities of life and do not even have shelter, food,

clothing or jobs, no claim to a right to privacy as a fundamental

right would lie. First and foremost, we do not find any conflict

between the right to life and the right to personal liberty. Both

rights are natural and inalienable rights of every human being

and are required in order to develop his/her personality to the

fullest. Indeed, the right to life and the right to personal liberty

go hand-in-hand, with the right to personal liberty being an

extension of the right to life. A large number of poor people that

Shri Venugopal talks about are persons who in today’s

completely different and changed world have cell phones, and

would come forward to press the fundamental right of privacy,

both against the Government and against other private

individuals. We see no antipathy whatsoever between the rich

and the poor in this context. It seems to us that this argument

is made through the prism of the Aadhar (Targeted Delivery of52Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act,

2016, by which the Aadhar card is the means to see that

various beneficial schemes of the Government filter down to

persons for whom such schemes are intended. This 9-Judge

Bench has not been constituted to look into the constitutional

validity of the Aadhar Act, but it has been constituted to

consider a much larger question, namely, that the right of

privacy would be found, inter alia, inArticle 21in both “life” and

“personal liberty” by rich and poor alike primarily against State

action.     This argument again does not impress us and is

rejected.

46.   Both the learned Attorney General and Shri Sundaram

next argued that the right to privacy is so vague and amorphous

a concept that it cannot be held to be a fundamental right. This

again need not detain us. Mere absence of a definition which

would encompass the many contours of the right to privacy

need not deter us from recognizing privacy interests when we

see them. As this judgment will presently show, these interests

are broadly classified into interests pertaining to the physical

realm and interests pertaining to the mind. As case law, both in53the U.S. and India show, this concept has travelled far from the

mere right to be let alone to recognition of a large number of

privacy interests, which apart from privacy of one’s home and

protection from unreasonable searches and seizures have been

extended to protecting an individual’s interests in making vital

personal choices such as the right to abort a fetus; rights of

same sex couples- including the right to marry; rights as to

procreation, contraception, general family relationships, child

rearing, education, data protection, etc.   This argument again

need not detain us any further and is rejected.

47.   As to the argument that if information is already in the

public domain and has been parted with, there is no privacy

right, we may only indicate that the question as to “voluntary”

parting with information has been dealt with, in the judgment in

Miller v. United States, 425 US 435 (1976).This Court inCanara Bank(supra) referred to the criticism of this judgment

as follows:

48.   Shri Sundaram has argued that rights have to be traced

directly to those expressly stated in the fundamental rights

chapter of the Constitution for such rights to receive protection,

and privacy is not one of them. It will be noticed that the dignity

of the individual is a cardinal value, which is expressed in the57Preamble to the Constitution.       Such dignity is not expressly

stated as a right in the fundamental rights chapter, but has

been read into the right to life and personal liberty. The right to

live with dignity is expressly read intoArticle 21by the judgment

inJolly George Varghese v. Bank of Cochin, (1980) 2 SCC

360 at paragraph 10.Similarly, the right against bar fetters and

handcuffing being integral to an individual’s dignity was read

intoArticle 21by the judgment in Charles Sobraj v. Delhi

Administration, (1978) 4 SCC 494 at paragraphs 192,197-B,

234   and    241    and    Prem     Shankar   Shukla    v.   Delhi

Administration, (1980) 3 SCC 526 at paragraphs 21 and 22. It

is too late in the day to canvas that a fundamental right must be

traceable to express language in Part III of the Constitution. As

will be pointed out later in this judgment, a Constitution has to

be read in such a way that words deliver up principles that are

to be followed and if this is kept in mind, it is clear that the

concept of privacy is contained not merely in personal liberty,

but also in the dignity of the individual.

49.   The judgment in Stanley v. Georgia, 22 L.Ed. 2d 542 at

549, 550 and 551 (1969) will serve to illustrate how privacy is58conceptually   different   from   an   expressly   enumerated

fundamental right. In this case, the appellant before the Court

was tried and convicted under a Georgia statute for knowingly

having possession of obscene material in his home. The U.S.

Supreme Court referred to judgments which had held that

obscenity is not within the area of constitutionally protected

speech under the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

Yet, the Court held:

Society of the Sisters, 268 U.S. 510, 69 L Ed 1070,
     45 S Ct 571, 39 ALR 468 (1925). This right to
     receive information and ideas, regardless of their
     social worth, see Winters v. New York, 333 US 507,
     510, 92 L Ed 840, 847, 68 S Ct 665 (1948), is
     fundamental to our free society. Moreover, in the
     context of this case—a prosecution for mere
     possession of printed or filmed matter in the privacy
     of a person's own home—that right takes on an
     added dimension. For also fundamental is the right
     to be free, except in very limited circumstances,
     from unwanted governmental intrusions into one's
     privacy…59These are the rights that appellant is asserting in
      the case before us. He is asserting the right to read
      or observe what he pleases—the right to satisfy his
      intellectual and emotional needs in the privacy of his
      own home. He is asserting the right to be free from
      state inquiry into the contents of his library. Georgia
      contends that appellant does not have these rights,
      that there are certain types of materials that the
      individual may not read or even possess. Georgia
      justifies this assertion by arguing that the films in the
      present case are obscene. But we think that mere
      categorization of these films as “obscene” is
      insufficient justification for such a drastic invasion of
      personal liberties guaranteed by the First and
      Fourteenth Amendments. Whatever may be the
      justifications for other statutes regulating obscenity,
      we do not think they reach into the privacy of one's
      own home. If the First Amendment means anything,
      it means that a State has no business telling a man,
      sitting alone in his own house, what books he may
      read or what films he may watch. Our whole
      constitutional heritage rebels at the thought of giving
      government the power to control men's minds.”
                                         (Emphasis Supplied)

      The Court concluded by stating:

Obviously, therefore, neither is privacy as vague and

amorphous as has been argued, nor is it correct to state that

unless it finds express mention in a provision in Part III of the

Constitution, it should not be regarded as a fundamental right.

51.   Shri Sundaram’s argument that personal liberty is

different from civil liberty need not detain us at all for the reason

that at least qua the fundament right to privacy — that right

being intimately connected with the liberty of the person would

certainly fall within the expression “personal liberty”.

52.   According to Shri Sundaram, every facet of privacy is not

protected. Instances of actions which, according to him, are not

protected are:

furnished for the purpose of obtaining a passport;

53.   We are afraid that this is really putting the cart before the

horse. Taxation laws which require the furnishing of information

certainly impinge upon the privacy of every individual which

ought to receive protection. Indeed, most taxation laws which

require the furnishing of such information also have, as a

concomitant    provision,    provisions    which     prohibit   the

dissemination of such information to others except under

specified circumstances which have relation to some legitimate

or important State or societal interest. The same would be the

case in relation to a census and details and documents

required to be furnished for obtaining a passport. Prohibitions

pertaining to viewing pornography have been dealt with earlier

in this judgment.     The U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in

Stanley (supra) held that such prohibitions would be invalid if

the State were to intrude into the privacy of one’s home.62

54.   The learned Attorney General drew our attention to a

number of judgments which have held that there is no

fundamental right to trade in liquor and citedKhoday

Distilleries Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (1995) 1 SCC 574.

Quite obviously, nobody has the fundamental right to carry on

business in crime.Indeed, in a situation where liquor is

expressly permitted to be sold under a licence, it would be

difficult to state that such seller of liquor would not have the

fundamental right to trade underArticle 19(1)(g), even though

the purport of some of our decisions seems to stating exactly

that – See the difference in approach between the earlier

Constitution Bench judgment inKrishna Kumar Narula v.

State of Jammu and Kashmir, (1967) 3 SCR 50, and the later

Constitution Bench judgment inHar Shankar v. The Dy.

Excise and Taxation Commr., (1975) 1 SCC 737.            In any

event, the analogy to be drawn from the cases dealing with

liquor does not take us further for the simple reason that the

fundamental right to privacy once recognized, must yield in

given circumstances to legitimate State interests in combating

crime.   But this arises only after recognition of the right to63privacy as a fundamental right and not before. What must be a

reasonable restriction in the interest of a legitimate State

interest or in public interest cannot determine whether the

intrusion into a person’s affairs is or is not a fundamental right.

Every State intrusion into privacy interests which deals with the

physical body or the dissemination of information personal to an

individual or personal choices relating to the individual would be

subjected   to   the   balancing   test   prescribed    under   the

fundamental right that it infringes depending upon where the

privacy interest claimed is founded.

55.   The learned Attorney General and Shri Tushar Mehta,

learned Additional Solicitor General, in particular, argued that

our statutes are replete with a recognition of the right to privacy,

and Shri Tushar Mehta cited provisions of theRight to

Information Act, 2005, theIndian Easements Act, 1882, theIndian Penal Code, 1860, theIndian Telegraph Act, 1885, the

Bankers’Books Evidence Act, 1891, theCredit Information

Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005, the Public Financial

Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity and Secrecy) Act, 1983,

thePayment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, the Income64Tax Act, 1961, the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and

other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, theCensus

Act, 1948, theCollection of Statistics Act, 2008, theJuvenile

Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, theProtection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012and theInformation Technology Act, 2000. According to them, since

these statutes already protect the privacy rights of individuals, it

is unnecessary to read a fundamental right of privacy into Part

III of the Constitution.

56.   Statutory law can be made and also unmade by a simple

Parliamentary majority. In short, the ruling party can, at will, do

away with any or all of the protections contained in the statutes

mentioned hereinabove.       Fundamental rights, on the other

hand, are contained in the Constitution so that there would be

rights that the citizens of this country may enjoy despite the

governments that they may elect. This is all the more so when

a particular fundamental right like privacy of the individual is an

“inalienable” right which inheres in the individual because he is

a human being. The recognition of such right in the

fundamental rights chapter of the Constitution is only a65recognition that such right exists notwithstanding the shifting

sands    of   majority   governments.     Statutes    may    protect

fundamental rights; they may also infringe them. In case any

existing statute or any statute to be made in the future is an

infringement of the inalienable right to privacy, this Court would

then be required to test such statute against such fundamental

right and if it is found that there is an infringement of such right,

without any countervailing societal or public interest, it would be

the duty of this Court to declare such legislation to be void as

offending the fundamental right to privacy.          This argument,

therefore, also merits rejection.

57.   Shri    Rakesh     Dwivedi    referred    copiously   to   the

“reasonable expectation of privacy” testlaid down bydecisions

of the U.S. Supreme Court. The origin of this test is to be found

in the concurring judgment of Harlan, J. in Katz v. United

States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967). Though this test has been applied

by several subsequent decisions, even in the United States, the

application of this test has been criticized.

66

58.   In Minnesota v. Carter, 525 U.S. 83, 119 S.Ct. 469 at

477 (1998), the concurring judgment of Scalia, J. criticized the

application of the aforesaid test in the following terms:

[(see: McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. 316 at 407 (1819)].

Indeed a Constitution is meant to govern people’s lives, and as72people’s lives keep evolving and changing with the times, so

does the interpretation of the Constitution to keep pace with

such changes. This was well expressed in at least two

judgments of this Court.InAshok Tanwar & Anr. v. State of

H.P. & Ors., (2005) 2 SCC 104, a Constitution Bench stated as

follows:

The ordinary rules and presumptions,
     brought in aid to interpret the statutes,
     cannot be made applicable while
     interpreting the provisions of the
     Constitution.In Minister of Home Affairs
     v. Fisher [(1979) 3 All ER 21 : 1980 AC
     319]      dealing     with     Bermudian
     Constitution, Lord Wilberforce reiterated
     that a Constitution is a document ‘sui
     generis, calling for principles of
     interpretation of its own, suitable to its
     character’.”
This Court inAruna Roy v. Union of India, (2002) 7
SCC 368, recalled the famous words of the Chief
Justice Holmes that “spirit of law is not logic but it
has been experience” and observed that these
words apply with greater force to constitutional law.76In the same judgment this Court expressed that
      Constitution is a permanent document framed by
      the people and has been accepted by the people to
      govern them for all times to come and that the
      words and expressions used in the Constitution, in
      that sense, have no fixed meaning and must receive
      interpretation based on the experience of the people
      in the course of working of the Constitution. The
      same thing cannot be said in relation to interpreting
      the words and expressions in a statute.”
                                      (at pages 114-116)

63.   To similar effect is the judgment of a 9-Judge Bench inI.R. Coelho (dead) by LRs v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors.,

(2007) 2 SCC 1, which states:

64.   It is in this background that the fundamental rights chapter

has been interpreted. We may also refer to paragraph 19 inM.

Nagaraj & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors., (2006) 8 SCC 212,

for the proposition that any true interpretation of fundamental

rights must be expansive, like the universe in which we live.77The content of fundamental rights keeps expanding to keep

         pace with human activity.

65.      It is as a result of constitutional interpretation that after

         Maneka Gandhi (supra),Article 21has been the repository of a

         vast multitude of human rights8.

66.      In India, therefore, the doctrine of originalism, which was

         referred to and relied upon by Shri Sundaram has no place.

         According to this doctrine, the first inquiry to be made is8(1) The right to go abroad.Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India(1978) 1 SCC 248 at paras 5, 48, 90, 171 and 216; (2)
The right of prisoners against bar fetters.Charles Sobraj v. Delhi Administration (1978) 4 SCC 494 at paras 192,
197-B, 234 and 241; (3) The right to legal aid.M.H. Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra(1978) 3 SCC 544 at para 12; (4)
The right to bail.Babu Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh(1978) 1 SCC 579 at para 8; (5) The right to live with dignity.Jolly George Varghese v. Bank of Cochin(1980) 2 SCC 360 at para 10; (6) The right against handcuffing.Prem
Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Administration(1980) 3 SCC 526 at paras 21 and 22; (7) The right against custodial
violence.Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra(1983) 2 SCC 96 at para 1; (8) The right to compensation for
unlawful arrest.Rudul Sah v. State of Bihar(1983) 4 SCC 141 at para 10; (9) The right to earn a livelihood.Olga
Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation(1985) 3 SCC 545 at para 37; (10) The right to know.Reliance
Petrochemicals Ltd. v. Proprietors of Indian Express Newspapers(1988) 4 SCC 592 at para 34; (11) The right
against public hanging.A.G. of India v. Lachma Devi (1989) Supp (1) SCC 264 at para 1; (12) The right to doctor’s
assistance at government hospitals.Paramanand Katara v. Union of India(1989) 4 SCC 286 at para 8; (13) The
right to medical care.Paramanand Katara v. Union of India(1989) 4 SCC 286 at para 8; (14) The right to shelter.Shantistar Builders v. N.K. Totame(1990) 1 SCC 520 at para 9 and 13; (15) The right to pollution free water and air.Subhash Kumar v. State of Bihar(1991) 1 SCC 598 at para 7; (16) The right to speedy trial.A.R. Antulay v. R.S.
Nayak(1992) 1 SCC 225 at para 86; (17) The right against illegal detention.Joginder Kumar v. State of Uttar
Pradesh(1994) 4 SCC 260 at paras 20 and 21; (18) The right to a healthy environment.Virender Gaur v. State of
Haryana(1995) 2 SCC 577 at para 7; (19) The right to health and medical care for workers.Consumer Education
and Research Centre v. Union of India(1995) 3 SCC 42 at paras 24 and 25; (20) The right to a clean environment.Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v. Union of India(1996) 5 SCC 647 at paras 13, 16 and 17; (21) The right against
sexual harassment.Vishaka and others v. State of Rajasthan and others(1997) 6 SCC 241 at paras 3 and 7; (22)
The right against noise pollution. In Re, Noise Pollution (2005) 5 SCC 733 at para 117; (23) The right to fair trial.Zahira Habibullah Sheikh & Anr. v. State of Gujarat & Ors.(2006) 3 SCC 374 at paras 36 and 38; (24) The right to
sleep. In Re, Ramlila Maidan Incident (2012) 5 SCC 1 at paras 311 and 318; (25) The right to reputation.Umesh
Kumar v. State of Andhra Pradesh(2013) 10 SCC 591 at para 18; (26) The right against solitary confinement.Shatrugan Chauhan & Anr. v. Union of India(2014) 3 SCC 1 at para 241.78whether the founding fathers had accepted or rejected a

particular right in the Constitution. According to the learned

Attorney General and Shri Sundaram, the right to privacy has

been considered and expressly rejected by our founding

fathers. At the second level, according to this doctrine, it is not

open to the Supreme Court to interpret the Constitution in a

manner that will give effect to a right that has been rejected by

the founding fathers. This can only be done by amending the

Constitution. It was, therefore, urged that it was not open for us

to interpret the fundamental rights chapter in such a manner as

to introduce a fundamental right to privacy, when the founding

fathers had rejected the same. It is only the Parliament in its

constituent capacity that can introduce such a right.          This

contention must be rejected having regard to the authorities

cited above. Further, in our Constitution, it is not left to all the

three organs of the State to interpret the Constitution. When a

substantial question as to the interpretation of the Constitution

arises, it is this Court and this Court alone underArticle 145(3)that is to decide what the interpretation of the Constitution shall79be, and for this purpose the Constitution entrusts this task to a

        minimum of 5 Judges of this Court.

67.      Does a fundamental right to privacy reside primarily inArticle 21read with certain other fundamental rights?

68.      At this point, it is important to advert to the U.S. Supreme

        Court’s development of the right of privacy.

The earlier cases tended to see the right of privacy as a

        property right as they were part of what was called the ‘Lochner

        era’ during which the doctrine of substantive due process

        elevated property rights over societal interests9. Thus in an

        early case, Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438 at 474,

        478 and 479 (1928), the majority of the Court held that wiretaps

        attached to telephone wires on public streets did not constitute

        a “search” under the Fourth Amendment since there was no

        physical entry into any house or office of the defendants. In a

        classic dissenting judgment, Louis Brandeis, J. held that this



9                                th
 This era lasted from the early 20 Century till 1937, when the proverbial switch in time that saved nine was made
by Justice Roberts. It was only from 1937 onwards that President Roosevelt’s New Deal legislations were upheld
by a majority of 5:4, having been struck down by a majority of 5:4 previously.80was too narrow a construction of the Fourth Amendment and

said in words that were futuristic that:

Goldberg, J. found this right to be embedded in the Ninth

Amendment which states that certain rights which are not

enumerated are nonetheless recognized as being reserved to

the people. White, J. found this right in the due process clause82of the Fourteenth Amendment, which prohibits the deprivation

of a person’s liberty without following due process. This view of

the law was recognized and applied in Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S.

113 (1973), in which a woman’s right to choose for herself

whether or not to abort a fetus was established, until the fetus

was found “viable”. Other judgments also recognized this right

of independence of choice in personal decisions relating to

marriage, Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1,12, 87 S.Ct. 1817,

1823, 18 L.Ed.2d 1010 (1967); procreation, Skinner v.

Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535, 541-542, 62 S.Ct. 1110, 1113-1114,

86 L.Ed. 1655 (1942); contraception, Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405

U.S. 438, 453-454, 92 S.Ct. 1029, 1038-1039, 31 L.Ed.2d 349

(1972), family relationships, Prince v. Massachusetts, 321

U.S. 158, 166, 64 S.Ct. 438, 442, 88 L.Ed. 645 (1944); and

child rearing and education, Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268

U.S. 510, 535, 45 S.Ct. 571, 573, 69 L.Ed. 1070 (1925).

71.   In a recent decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in United

States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400 (2012), the U.S. Supreme

Court’s majority judgment traces the right of privacy through the83labyrinth of case law in Part II of Scalia, J.’s opinion, and

regards it as a constitutionally protected right.

72.   Based upon the prevalent thinking of the U.S. Supreme

Court, a   seminal    judgment     was    delivered   by   Mathew,

J. inGobind(supra).This judgment dealt with the M.P. Police

Regulations, similar to the Police Regulations contained in

Kharak Singh (supra).        After setting out the majority and

minority opinions in the said judgment, Mathew, J. went on to

discuss the U.S. Supreme Court judgments in Griswold (supra)

and Roe (supra). In a very instructive passage the learned

Judge held:

Subtler and far reaching means of invading privacy
will make it possible to be heard in the street what is
whispered in the closet. Yet, too broad a definition
of privacy raises serious questions about the
propriety of judicial reliance on a right that is not
explicit in the Constitution. Of course, privacy
primarily concerns the individuals. It therefore
relates to and overlaps with the concept of liberty.
The most serious advocate of privacy must confess
that there are serious problems of defining the
essence and scope of the right. Privacy interest in
autonomy must also be placed in the context of
other rights and values.

24. Any right to privacy must encompass and
protect the personal intimacies of the home, the
family marriage, motherhood, procreation and child
rearing. This catalogue approach to the question is
obviously not as instructive as it does not give
analytical picture of distinctive characteristics of the
right of privacy. Perhaps, the only suggestion that
can be offered as unifying principle underlying the
concept has been the assertion that a claimed right
must be a fundamental right implicit in the concept
of ordered liberty.

27. There are two possible theories for protecting
privacy of home. The first is that activities in the85home harm others only to the extent that they cause
      offence resulting from the mere thought that
      individuals might be engaging in such activities and
      that such ‘harm’ is not constitutionally protectable by
      the State. The second is that individuals need a
      place of sanctuary where they can be free from
      societal control. The importance of such a sanctuary
      is that individuals can drop the mask, desist for a
      while from projecting on the world the image they
      want to be accepted as themselves, an image that
      may reflect the values of their peers rather than the
      realities of their natures.

28. The right to privacy in any event will
      necessarily have to go through a process of case-

by-case development. Therefore, even assuming
      that the right to personal liberty, the right to move
      freely throughout the territory of India and the
      freedom of speech create an independent right of
      privacy as an emanation from them which one can
      characterize as a fundamental right, we do not think
      that the right is absolute.”
                                         (at pages 155-157)

      The Police Regulations were, however, not struck down,

but   were    termed   as   being   perilously   close   to     being

unconstitutional.

73.   Shri Sundaram has brought to our notice the fact that

Mathew, J. did not declare privacy as a fundamental right. By

this judgment, he reached certain conclusions on the

assumption that it was a fundamental right. He is correct in this

submission.    However, this would not take the matter very86much further inasmuch as even though the later judgments

have referred toGobind(supra) as the starting point of the

fundamental right to privacy, in our view, for the reasons given

by us in this judgment, even dehorsGobind(supra) these

cases can be supported on the ground that there exists a

fundamental right to privacy.

74.InR. Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1994) 6 SCC

632, this Court had to decide on the rights of privacy vis-a-vis

the freedom of the press, and in so doing, referred to a large

number of judgments and arrived at the following conclusion:

bearing and education among other matters. None
      can publish anything concerning the above matters
      without his consent—whether truthful or otherwise
      and whether laudatory or critical. If he does so, he
      would be violating the right to privacy of the person
      concerned and would be liable in an action for
      damages. Position may, however, be different, if a
      person voluntarily thrusts himself into controversy or
      voluntarily invites or raises a controversy.

87(2) The rule aforesaid is subject to the exception,
that any publication concerning the aforesaid
aspects     becomes      unobjectionable   if    such
publication is based upon public records including
court records. This is for the reason that once a
matter becomes a matter of public record, the right
to privacy no longer subsists and it becomes a
legitimate subject for comment by press and media
among others. We are, however, of the opinion that
in the interests of decency [Article 19(2)]an
exception must be carved out to this rule, viz., a
female who is the victim of a sexual assault, kidnap,
abduction or a like offence should not further be
subjected to the indignity of her name and the
incident being publicised in press/media.

(3) There is yet another exception to the rule in (1)
above—indeed, this is not an exception but an
independent rule. In the case of public officials, it is
obvious, right to privacy, or for that matter, the
remedy of action for damages is simply not
available with respect to their acts and conduct
relevant to the discharge of their official duties. This
is so even where the publication is based upon facts
and statements which are not true, unless the
official establishes that the publication was made
(by the defendant) with reckless disregard for truth.
In such a case, it would be enough for the
defendant (member of the press or media) to prove
that he acted after a reasonable verification of the
facts; it is not necessary for him to prove that what
he has written is true. Of course, where the
publication is proved to be false and actuated by
malice or personal animosity, the defendant would
have no defence and would be liable for damages.

It is equally obvious that in matters not relevant to
the discharge of his duties, the public official enjoys
the same protection as any other citizen, as
explained in (1) and (2) above. It needs no
reiteration that judiciary, which is protected by the88power to punish for contempt of court and
                 Parliament and legislatures protected as their
                 privileges are byArticles 105and104respectively
                 of the Constitution of India, represent exceptions to
                 this rule.

(4) So far as the Government, local authority and
                 other    organs      and   institutions   exercising
                 governmental power are concerned, they cannot
                 maintain a suit for damages for defaming them.

(5) Rules 3 and 4 do not, however, mean
                 thatOfficial Secrets Act, 1923, or any similar
                 enactment or provision having the force of law does
                 not bind the press or media.

(6) There is no law empowering the State or its
                 officials to prohibit, or to impose a prior restraint
                 upon the press/media.”10
                                                   (at pages 649-651)

75.      Similarly, inPUCL v. Union of India, (1997) 1 SCC 301,

        this Court dealt with telephone tapping as follows:

the facts of the said case. But the right to hold a
      telephone conversation in the privacy of one’s home
      or office without interference can certainly be
      claimed as “right to privacy”. Conversations on the
      telephone are often of an intimate and confidential
      character. Telephone conversation is a part of
      modern man’s life. It is considered so important that
      more and more people are carrying mobile
      telephone instruments in their pockets. Telephone
      conversation is an important facet of a man’s private
      life. Right to privacy would certainly include
      telephone conversation in the privacy of one’s home
      or    office.    Telephone-tapping      would,     thus,
      infractArticle 21of the Constitution of India unless it
      is permitted under the procedure established by
      law.”
                                                 (at page 311)

      The Court then went on to applyArticle 17of the

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 which

recognizes the right to privacy and also referred toArticle 12of

the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 which is in the

same terms. It then imported these international law concepts

to interpretArticle 21in accordance with these concepts.

76.InSharda v. Dharmpal(supra), this Court was

concerned with whether a medical examination could be

ordered by a Court in a divorce proceeding. After referring to

some of the judgments of this Court and the U.K. Courts, this

Court held:

77.   All this leads to a discussion on what exactly is the

fundamental right of privacy – where does it fit in Chapter III of

the Constitution, and what are the parameters of its

constitutional protection.

78.   In an instructive article reported in Volume 64 of the

California Law Review, written in 1976, Gary L. Bostwick

suggested that the right to privacy in fact encompasses three

separate and distinct rights. According to the learned author,

these three components are the components of repose,94sanctuary, and intimate decision. The learned author puts it

thus (at pages 1482-1483):-

79.   Shortly thereafter, in 1977, an instructive judgment is to

be found in Whalen v. Roe, 429 U.S. 589 at 598 and 599 by

the U.S. Supreme Court. This case dealt with a legislation by95the State of New York in which the State, in a centralized

computer file, registered the names and addresses of all

persons    who    have      obtained,   pursuant   to    a   Doctor’s

prescription, certain drugs for which there is both a lawful and

unlawful market. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the statute,

finding that it would seem clear that the State’s vital interest in

controlling the distribution of dangerous drugs would support

the legislation at hand. In an instructive footnote – 23 to the

judgment, the U.S. Supreme Court found that the right to

privacy was grounded after Roe (supra) in the Fourteenth

Amendment’s       concept    of   personal liberty.     Having thus

grounded the right, the U.S. Supreme Court in a very significant

passage stated:

80.   In fact, in the Constitution of South Africa of 1996, which

Constitution was framed after apartheid was thrown over by the

South African people, the right to privacy has been expressly

declared as a fundamental freedom as follows:

(b) not to be detained without trial;

(c) to be free from all forms of violence from either
      public or private sources;

(d) not to be tortured in any way; and

(e) not to be treated or punished in a cruel, inhuman
      or degrading way.

(2) Everyone has the right to bodily and
      psychological integrity, which includes the right—

(a) to make decisions concerning reproduction;

(b) to security in and control over their body; and

(c) not to be subjected to medical or scientific
      experiments without their informed consent.

14. Privacy
      Everyone has the right to privacy, which includes
      the right not to have—97

(a) their person or home searched;

(b) their property searched;

(c) their possessions seized; or

(d) the privacy of their communications infringed.”


      The Constitutional Court of South Africa in NM & Ors. v.

Smith & Ors., 2007 (5) SA 250 (CC), had this to say about the

fundamental right to privacy recognized by the South African

Constitution:

As is well known, this cardinal constitutional value has been

borrowed from the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the

Citizen of 1789, which defined “liberty” inArticle 4as follows:

In the ultimate analysis, the balancing act that is to be carried

out between individual, societal and State interests must be left

to the training and expertise of the judicial mind.

87.   It is important to advert to one other interesting argument

made on the side of the petitioner. According to the petitioners,

even in British India, the right to privacy was always legislatively

recognized. We were referred to theIndian Telegraph Actof

1885, vintage and in particularSection 5thereof which reads as

under:-

“5. (1)    On the occurrence of any public
      emergency, or in the interest of the public safety,
      the Governor General in Council or a Local
      Government, or any officer specially authorized in
      this behalf by the Governor General in Council,
      may–

(a) take temporary possession of any telegraph
          established, maintained or worked by any
          person licensed under this Act; or

(b) order that any message or class of messages
          to or from any person or class of persons, or106relating to any particular subject, brought for
         transmission by or transmitted or received by
         any telegraph, shall not be transmitted, or shall
         be intercepted or detained, or shall be
         disclosed to the Government or an officer
         thereof mentioned in the order.

(2) If any doubt arises as to the existence of a
     public emergency, or whether any act done under
     sub-section (1) was in the interest of the public
     safety, a certificate signed by a Secretary to the
     Government of India or to the Local Government
     shall be conclusive proof on the point.”


     We were also referred toSection 26of the Indian Post

Office Act, 1898 for the same purpose.

“26. Power to intercept postal articles for public
     good.— (1) On the occurrence of any public
     emergency, or in the interest of the public safety or
     tranquility, the Central Government, or a State
     Government, or any officer specially authorized in
     this behalf by the Central or the State Government
     may, by order in writing, direct that any postal article
     or class or description of postal articles in course of
     transmission by post shall be intercepted or
     detained, or shall be disposed of in such manner as
     the authority issuing the order may direct.

(2) If any doubt arises as to the existence of a public
     emergency, or as to whether any act done under
     sub-section (1) was in the interest of the public
     safety or tranquility, a certificate of the Central
     Government or, as the case may be, of the State
     Government shall be conclusive proof on the point.”107

88.   Coming to more recent times, theRight to Information

Act, 2005inSection 8(1)(j)states as follows:-

58. The right to privacy is also recognized as a
basic human right underArticle 12of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights Act, 1948, which
states as follows:

59.Article 17of theInternational Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights Act, 1966, to which India is a
party also protects that right and states as follows:

60. This Court in R. Rajagopal, (1994) 6 SCC 632
held as follows: (SCC pp. 649-50, para 26)

      “(1)… The right to privacy is implicit in
      the right to life and liberty guaranteed to
      the citizens of this country by Article

21. It is a ‘right to be let alone’. A citizen
      has a right to safeguard the privacy of
      his     own,      his   family,     marriage,
      procreation, motherhood, child bearing
      and education among other matters.”

62. The public authority also is not legally obliged to
give or provide information even if it is held, or
under its control, if that information falls under
clause (j) of sub-section (1) ofSection 8.Section
8(1)(j)is of considerable importance so far as this
case is concerned, hence given below, for ready
reference:-

63.Section 8begins with a non obstante clause,
which gives that section an overriding effect, in case
of conflict, over the other provisions of the Act. Even
if, there is any indication to the contrary, still there is
no obligation on the public authority to give
information to any citizen of what has been
mentioned in clauses (a) to (j). The public authority,
as already indicated, cannot access all the
information from a private individual, but only those
information which he is legally obliged to pass on to
a public authority by law, and also only those
information to which the public authority can have
access in accordance with law. Even those
information, if personal in nature, can be made
available only subject to the limitations provided
inSection 8(j)of the RTI Act. Right to be left alone,
as propounded in Olmstead v. United States [72 L
Ed 944 : 277 US 438 (1928)], is the most
comprehensive of the rights and most valued by
civilized man.

64. Recognizing the fact that the right to privacy is a
sacrosanct facet ofArticle 21of the Constitution, the
legislation has put a lot of safeguards to protect the
rights underSection 8(j), as already indicated. If the
information sought for is personal and has no
relationship with any public activity or interest or it
will not subserve larger public interest, the public
authority or the officer concerned is not legally
obliged to provide those information. Reference
may be made to a recent judgment of this Court
inGirish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central
Information Commissioner(2013) 1 SCC 212,111wherein this Court held that since there is no bona
      fide public interest in seeking information, the
      disclosure of said information would cause
      unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual
      underSection 8(1)(j)of the Act. Further, if the
      authority finds that information sought for can be
      made available in the larger public interest, then the
      officer should record his reasons in writing before
      providing the information, because the person from
      whom information is sought for, has also a right to
      privacy guaranteed underArticle 21of the
      Constitution.”
                                          (at page 112-114)

89.   There can be no doubt that counsel for the petitioners are

right in their submission that the legislature has also recognized

the fundamental right of privacy and, therefore, it is too late in

the day to go back on this. Much water has indeed flowed

under the bridge since the decisions in M.P. Sharma (supra)

and Kharak Singh (supra).

The Inalienable Nature of the Right to Privacy

90.   Learned counsel for the petitioners also referred to

another important aspect of the right of privacy. According to

learned counsel for the petitioner this right is a natural law right

which is inalienable.    Indeed, the reference order itself, in

paragraph 12, refers to this aspect of the fundamental right

contained. It was, therefore, argued before us that given the112international conventions referred to hereinabove and the fact

        that this right inheres in every individual by virtue of his being a

        human being, such right is not conferred by the Constitution but

        is only recognized and given the status of being fundamental.

        There is no doubt that the petitioners are correct in this

        submission.           However, one important road block in the way

        needs to be got over.

91.InAdditional District Magistrate, Jabalpur v. S.S.

        Shukla, (1976) 2 SCC 521, a Constitution Bench of this Court

        arrived at the conclusion (by majority) thatArticle 21is the sole

        repository of all rights to life and personal liberty, and, when

        suspended, takes away those rights altogether.

A remarkable dissent was that of Khanna,J.1212Khanna, J. was in line to be Chief Justice of India but was superseded because of this dissenting judgment. Nani
Palkhivala in an article written on this great Judge’s supersession ended with a poignant sentence, “To the stature
of such a man, the Chief Justiceship of India can add nothing.” Seervai, in his monumental treatise “Constitutional
Law of India” had to this to say:

The fact that the framers of the Constitution made
an aspect of such right a part of the fundamental
rights did not have the effect of exterminating the
independent identity of such right and of makingArticle 21to be the sole repository of that right. Its
real effect was to ensure that a law under which a
person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty
should prescribe a procedure for such deprivation115or, according to the dictumlaid down byMukherjea,
      J. in Gopalan’s case, such law should be a valid law
      not violative of fundamental rights guaranteed by
      Part III of the Constitution. Recognition as
      fundamental right of one aspect of the pre-

constitutional right cannot have the effect of making
      things less favourable so far as the sanctity of life
      and personal liberty is concerned compared to the
      position if an aspect of such right had not been
      recognised as fundamental right because of the
      vulnerability of fundamental rights accruing fromArticle 359.I am also unable to agree that in view of
      the Presidential Order in the matter of sanctity of life
      and liberty, things would be worse off compared to
      the state of law as it existed before the coming into
      force of the Constitution.”
                                       (at pages 747 and 751)

92.   According to us this is a correct enunciation of the law for

the following reasons:

Neither the Constitution nor any law confers
           the right to life. That right arises from the
           existence of a living human body. The most
           famous remedy for securing personal liberty,
           the writ of habeas corpus, requires the
           production before the court of the body of the
           person alleged to be illegally detained. The
           Constitution gives protection against the
           deprivation of life and personal liberty; so do
           the civil and criminal laws in force in India…”
           (See, Seervai, Constitutional Law of India (4th
           Edition) Appendix pg. 2219).

We are of the view that the aforesaid statement made by

the learned author reflects the correct position in constitutional

law. We, therefore, expressly overrule the majority judgments in

ADM Jabalpur (supra).

93.   Before parting with this subject, we may only indicate that

the majority opinion was done away with by the Constitution’s

44th Amendment two years after the judgment was delivered.

By that Amendment,Article 359was amended to state that

where a proclamation of emergency is in operation, the

President may by order declare that the right to move any Court

for the enforcement of rights conferred by Part III of the121Constitution may remain suspended for the period during which

such proclamation is in force, exceptingArticles 20and21.On

this score also, it is clear that the right of privacy is an

inalienable human right which inheres in every person by virtue

of the fact that he or she is a human being.

Conclusion

94.   This reference is answered by stating that the inalienable

fundamental right to privacy resides inArticle 21and other

fundamental freedoms contained in Part III of the Constitution

of India. M.P. Sharma (supra) and the majority in Kharak

Singh (supra), to the extent that they indicate to the contrary,

stand overruled. The later judgments of this Court recognizing

privacy as a fundamental right do not need to be revisited.

These cases are, therefore, sent back for adjudication on merits

to the original Bench of 3 honourable Judges of this Court in

light of the judgment just delivered by us.

…………………………......J.
                                    (R.F. Nariman)
New Delhi;

August 24, 2017.

122REPORTABLE

       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.)
& Anr.                            …….Petitioner (s)

                    VERSUS

Union of India & Ors.             …….Respondent(s)

                    WITHT.C.(C) No. 151 of 2013T.C.(C) No. 152 of 2013W.P.(C) No. 833 of 2013W.P.(C) No. 829 of 2013W.P.(C) No. 932 of 2013Cont. Pet. (C) No. 144 of 2014INW.P. (C) No. 494 of 2012T.P. (C) No. 313 of 2014T.P. (C) No. 312 of 20141S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 2524 of 2014W.P. (C) No. 37 of 2015W.P. (C) No. 220 of 2015Cont. Pet. (C) No. 674 of 2015INW.P. (C) No. 829 of 2013T.P.(C) No. 921 of 2015Cont. Pet. (C) No. 470 of 2015INW.P. (C) No. 494 of 2012Cont. Pet. (C) No. 444 of 2016INW.P. (C) No. 494 of 2012Cont. Pet. (C) No. 608 of 2016INW.P. (C) No. 494 of 2012W.P. (C) No. 797 of 2016Cont. Pet. (C) No. 844 of 2017INW.P. (C) No. 494 of 2012W.P. (C) No. 342 of 2017AND2W.P. (C) No. 372 of 2017JUDGMENT


Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.

1)   I have had the benefit of reading the scholarly

opinions of my esteemed learned brothers, Justice J.

Chelameswar, Justice S.A. Bobde, Justice Rohinton

Fali Nariman and Dr. Justice D.Y. Chandrachud.

Having read them carefully, I have nothing more

useful to add to the reasoning and the conclusion

arrived at by my esteemed brothers in their respective

opinions.

2)   However, keeping in view the importance of the

questions referred to this Bench, I wish to add only

few words of concurrence of my own.

3

3)   In substance, two questions were referred to this

Nine Judge Bench, first, whether the law laid down in

the case ofM.P.Sharma and others vs. Satish

Chandra, District Magistrate Delhi & Ors., AIR 1954

SC 300 and Kharak Singh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh

& Ors. AIR 1963 SC 1295 insofar as it relates to the

"right to privacy of an individual”        is correct and

second, whether "right to privacy" is a fundamental

right under Part III of the Constitution of India?

4)   Before I examine these two questions, it is

apposite   to   take   note   of   the   Preamble    to   the

Constitution, which, in my view, has bearing on the

questions referred.

5)   The Preamble to the Constitution reads as

under:-

The Constitution was accordingly adopted, enacted

and then given to ourselves.

5

8)   The keynote of the Preamble was to lay emphasis

on two positive aspects – one, "the Unity of the Nation"

and the second "Dignity of the individual".         The

expression "Dignity" carried with it moral and spiritual

imports. It also implied an obligation on the part of

the Union to respect the personality of every citizen

and create the conditions in which every citizen would

be left free to find himself/herself and attain self-

fulfillment.

9)   The incorporation of expression "Dignity of the

individual" in the Preamble was aimed essentially to

show explicit repudiation of what people of this

Country had inherited from the past. Dignity of the

individual was, therefore, always considered the prime

constituent of the fraternity, which assures the dignity

to    every    individual.   Both    expressions    are

interdependent and intertwined.

6

10)   In my view, unity and integrity of the Nation

cannot survive unless the dignity of every individual

citizen is guaranteed. It is inconceivable to think of

unity and integration without the assurance to an

individual to preserve his dignity. In other words,

regard and respect by every individual for the dignity

of the other one brings the unity and integrity of the

Nation.

11)   The    expressions   "liberty“,   "equality"   and

"fraternity" incorporated in the Preamble are not

separate entities. They have to be read in juxtaposition

while dealing with the rights of the citizens. They, in

fact, form a union. If these expressions are divorced

from each other, it will defeat the very purpose of

democracy.

12)   In other words, liberty cannot be divorced from

equality so also equality cannot be divorced from7liberty and nor can liberty and equality be divorced

from    fraternity.   The   meaning   assigned   to   these

expressions has to be given due weightage while

interpreting Articles of Part III of the Constitution.

13)    It is, therefore, the duty of the Courts and

especially this Court as sentinel on the qui vive to

strike a balance between the changing needs of the

Society and the protection of the rights of the citizens

as and when the issue relating to the infringement of

the rights of the citizen comes up for consideration.

Such a balance can be achieved only through securing

and protecting liberty, equality and fraternity with

social and political justice to all the citizens under rule

of law (see-S.S.Bola & Ors. vs. B.D. Sardana & Ors.

1997 (8) SCC 522).

14)    Our Constitution has recognized certain existing

cherished rights of an individual. These rights are8incorporated in different Articles of Part III of the

Constitution under the heading-Fundamental Rights.

In so doing, some rights were incorporated and those,

which were not incorporated, were read in Part III by

process of judicial interpretation depending upon the

nature of right asserted by the citizens on case-to-case

basis.

15)   It was not possible for the framers of the

Constitution to incorporate each and every right be

that a natural or common law right of an individual in

Part III of the Constitution. Indeed, as we can see

whenever occasion arose in the last 50 years to decide

as to whether any particular right alleged by the

citizen is a fundamental right or not, this Court with

the process of judicial interpretation recognized with

remarkable   clarity   several   existing   natural   and

common law rights of an individual as fundamental9rights falling in Part III though not defined in the

Constitution. It was done keeping in view the fact that

the Constitution is a sacred living document and,

hence, susceptible to appropriate interpretation of its

provisions based on changing needs of "We, the

People” and other well defined parameters.

16)Article 21is perhaps the smallest Article in terms

of words (18) in the Constitution. It is the heart of the

Constitution as was said by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar. It

reads as under: -

In other words, it is born with the human being and

extinguish with human being.

26)   One cannot conceive an individual enjoying

meaningful life with dignity without such right. Indeed,

it is one of those cherished rights, which every civilized

society governed by rule of law always recognizes in

every human being and is under obligation to

recognize such rights in order to maintain and

preserve the dignity of an individual regardless of15gender, race, religion, caste and creed. It is, of course,

subject to imposing certain reasonable restrictions

keeping in view the social, moral and compelling

public interest, which the State is entitled to impose

by law.

27)   “Right to privacy” is not defined in law except in

the dictionaries. The Courts, however, by process of

judicial interpretation, has assigned meaning to this

right in the context of specific issues involved on case-

to-case basis.

28)   The most popular meaning of “right to privacy”

is - "the right to be let alone”.InGobind vs. State of

Madhya     Pradesh    &   Anr.,   (1975)   2   SCC   148,

K.K.Mathew, J. noticed multiple facets of this right

(Para 21-25) and then gave a rule of caution while

examining the contours of such right on case-to-case

basis.

16

29)   In my considered view, the answer to the

questions can be found in the lawlaid down bythis

Court in the cases beginning fromRustom Cavasjee

Cooper(supra) followed byManeka Gandhi vs. Union

of India & Anr.(1978) 1 SCC 248, People’s Union forCivil Liberties (PUCL) vs. Union of India & Anr.,

(1997) 1 SCC 301, Gobind’s case (supra), Mr. "X" vs.

Hospital ‘Z’(1998) 8 SCC 296, District Registrar &

Collector, Hyderabad & Anr. vs. Canara Bank &

Ors., (2005) 1 SCC 496 and lastly inThalappalam

Service Coop. Bank Ltd. & Ors. vs. State of Kerala

& Ors., (2013) 16 SCC 82.

30)   It is in these cases and especially the two –

namely,Gobind(supra) andDistrict Registrar(supra),

their Lordships very succinctly examined in great

detail the issue in relation to "right to privacy" in the17light of Indian and American case law and various

international conventions.

31)   InGobind’case, the learned Judge, K.K.Mathew

J. speaking for the Bench held and indeed rightly in

Para 28 as under:

and further emanating fromArticle 19(1)(d)which

gives to every citizen            "a right to move freely

throughout      the   territory    of   India"   and   lastly,

emanating from the expression “personal liberty"

Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar & Ors. vs. State of

Maharashtra & Anr.(1966) 3 SCR 744 at page 753).

41)    Suffice it to say that as and when any of these

questions arise in any case, the appropriate Bench will

examine such questions on its merits in accordance

with law.

42)    Before I part, I wish to place on record that it was

pleasure hearing the erudite arguments addressed by

all the learned counsel. Every counsel argued with

brevity, lucidity and with remarkable clarity. The hard

work done by each counsel was phenomenal and

deserves to be complimented. Needless to say, but for

their able assistance both in terms of oral argument as

well    as    written    briefs   (containing    thorough23submissions, variety of case law and the literature on

the subject), it was well nigh impossible to express the

views.

………..................................J.
                        [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
New Delhi,
August 24, 2017.

241

REPORTABLE

              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012



JUSTICE K.S. PUTTASWAMY (RETD.),
AND ANOTHER                                        …PETITIONERS

VS.

CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.144 OF 2014 IN W.P. (C) NO.494/2012

T.P. (CIVIL) NO. 313 OF 2014

T.P. (CIVIL) NO.312 OF 2014

S.L.P. (CRL.) NO.2524 OF 2014

W.P.(C) NO.37 OF 20152W.P.(CIVIL) NO. 220 OF 2015

CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO.674 OF 2015 IN W.P. (C) NO.829 OF 2013T.P. (CIVIL) NO. 921/2015CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO.470 OF 2015 IN W.P.(C) NO.494 OF 2012

CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO.444 OF 2016 IN W.P. (C) NO.494 OF 2012

CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO.608 OF 2016 IN W.P. (C) NO.494 OF 2012

W.P.(C) NO. 797 OF 2016

CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO.844 OF 2017 IN W.P. (C) NO.494 OF 2012

AND

W.P. (CIVIL) NO. 000372 OF 2017




                            JUDGMENT


SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J

1.     I have had the benefit of reading the exhaustive and erudite

opinions of Rohinton F. Nariman, J, and Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.      The

conclusion is the same, answering the reference that privacy is not just a

common law right, but a fundamental right falling in Part III of the3Constitution of India. I agree with this conclusion as privacy is a primal,

natural right which is inherent to an individual. However, I am tempted

to set out my perspective on the issue of privacy as a right, which to my

mind, is an important core of any individual existence.

2.     A human being, from an individual existence, evolved into a

social animal. Society thus envisaged a collective living beyond the

individual as a unit to what came to be known as the family. This, in

turn, imposed duties and obligations towards the society. The right to

“do as you please” became circumscribed by norms commonly

acceptable to the larger social group. In time, the acceptable norms

evolved into formal legal principles.

3.     “The right to be”, though not extinguished for an individual, as

the society evolved, became hedged in by the complexity of the norms.

There has been a growing concern of the impact of technology which

breaches this “right to be”, or privacy – by whatever name we may call

it.

4.     The importance of privacy may vary from person to person

dependent on his/her approach to society and his concern for being left4alone or not. That some people do not attach importance to their

privacy cannot be the basis for denying recognition to the right to

privacy as a basic human right.

5.     It is not India alone, but the world that recognises the right of

privacy as a basic human right. The Universal Declaration of Human

Rights to which India is a signatory, recognises privacy as an

international human right.

6.     The importance of this right to privacy cannot be diluted and the

significance of this is that the legal conundrum was debated and is to be

settled in the present reference by a nine-Judges Constitution Bench.

7.     This reference has arisen from the challenge to what is called the

‘Aadhar Card Scheme’. On account of earlier judicial pronouncements,

there was a cleavage of opinions and to reconcile this divergence of

views, it became necessary for the reference to be made to a nine-

Judges Bench.

8.     It is nobody’s case that privacy is not a valuable right, but the

moot point is whether it is only a common law right or achieves the

status of a fundamental right under the Grundnorm – the Indian5Constitution. We have been ably assisted by various senior counsels

           both for and against the proposition as to whether privacy is a

           Constitutional right or not.

PRIVACY

9.        In the words of Lord Action:

10.       Privacy is an inherent right. It is thus not given, but already exists.

           It is about respecting an individual and it is undesirable to ignore a

           person’s wishes without a compelling reason to do so.

11.       The right to privacy may have different aspects starting from ‘the

           right to be let alone’ in the famous article by Samuel Warren and Louis

           D. Brandeis 2 . One such aspect is an individual’s right to control

           dissemination of his personal information. There is nothing wrong in

           individuals limiting access and their ability to shield from unwanted

           access. This aspect of the right to privacy has assumed particular1The History of Freedom and Other Essays (1907), p 5872The Right to Privacy 4 HLR 1936significance in this information age and in view of technological

        improvements. A person-hood would be a protection of one’s

        personality, individuality and dignity.3 However, no right is unbridled

        and so is it with privacy. We live in a society/ community. Hence,

        restrictions arise from the interests of the community, state and from

        those of others. Thus, it would be subject to certain restrictions which I

        will revert to later.

PRIVACY & TECHNOLOGY

12.       We are in an information age.                          With the growth and

        development of technology, more information is now easily available.

        The information explosion has manifold advantages but also some

        disadvantages. The access to information, which an individual may not

        want to give, needs the protection of privacy.

The right to privacy is claimed qua the State and non-State actors.

        Recognition and enforcement of claims qua non-state actors may

        require legislative intervention by the State.

3Daniel Solove, ’10 Reasons Why Privacy Matters’ published on January 20, 2014
https://www.teachprivacy.com/10-reasons-privacy-matters/7A. Privacy Concerns Against The State

13.       The growth and development of technology has created new

        instruments for the possible invasion of privacy by the State, including

        through surveillance, profiling and data collection and processing.

        Surveillance is not new, but technology has permitted surveillance in

        ways that are unimaginable. Edward Snowden shocked the world with

        his disclosures about global surveillance. States are utilizing technology

        in the most imaginative ways particularly in view of increasing global

        terrorist attacks and heightened public safety concerns. One such

        technique being adopted by States is ‘profiling’. The European Union

        Regulation of 20164 on data privacy defines ‘Profiling’ as any form of

        automated processing of personal data consisting of the use of personal

        data to evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a natural person, in

        particular to analyse or predict aspects concerning that natural person's

        performance at work, economic situation, health, personal preferences,4Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation)8interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements5. Such profiling

        can result in discrimination based on religion, ethnicity and caste.

        However, ‘profiling’ can also be used to further public interest and for

        the benefit of national security.

14.       The security environment, not only in our country, but

        throughout the world makes the safety of persons and the State a

        matter to be balanced against this right to privacy.


        B. Privacy Concerns Against Non-State Actors

15.       The capacity of non-State actors to invade the home and privacy

        has also been enhanced. Technological development has facilitated

        journalism that is more intrusive than ever before.

16.       Further, in this digital age, individuals are constantly generating

        valuable data which can be used by non-State actors to track their

        moves, choices and preferences. Data is generated not just by active

        sharing of information, but also passively, with every click on the ‘world5Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation)9wide web’. We are stated to be creating an equal amount of information

        every other day, as humanity created from the beginning of recorded

        history to the year 2003 – enabled by the ‘world wide web’.6

17.       Recently, it was pointed out that “‘Uber’, the world’s largest taxi

        company, owns no vehicles. ‘Facebook’, the world’s most popular media

        owner, creates no content. ‘Alibaba’, the most valuable retailer, has no

        inventory. And ‘Airbnb’, the world’s largest accommodation provider,

        owns no real estate. Something interesting is happening.”7 ‘Uber’ knows

        our whereabouts and the places we frequent. ‘Facebook’ at the least,

        knows who we are friends with. ‘Alibaba’ knows our shopping habits.

        ‘Airbnb’ knows where we are travelling to. Social networks providers,

        search engines, e-mail service providers, messaging applications are all

        further examples of non-state actors that have extensive knowledge of

        our movements, financial transactions, conversations – both personal

        and professional, health, mental state, interest, travel locations, fares

        and shopping habits. As we move towards becoming a digital economy6Michael L. Rustad, SannaKulevska, Reconceptualizing the right to be forgotten to enable transatlantic data flow,
28 Harv. J.L. & Tech. 3497https://techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/in-the-age-of-disintermediation-the-battle-is-all-for-the-customer-interface/
Tom Goodwin ‘The Battle is for Customer Interface’10and increase our reliance on internet based services, we are creating

deeper and deeper digital footprints – passively and actively.

18.    These digital footprints and extensive data can be analyzed

computationally to reveal patterns, trends, and associations, especially

relating to human behavior and interactions and hence, is valuable

information. This is the age of ‘big data’. The advancement in technology

has created not just new forms of data, but also new methods of

analysing the data and has led to the discovery of new uses for data. The

algorithms are more effective and the computational power has

magnified exponentially. A large number of people would like to keep

such search history private, but it rarely remains private, and is collected,

sold and analysed for purposes such as targeted advertising. Of course,

‘big data’ can also be used to further public interest. There may be cases

where collection and processing of big data is legitimate and

proportionate, despite being invasive of privacy otherwise.

19.    Knowledge about a person gives a power over that person. The

personal data collected is capable of effecting representations,

influencing decision making processes and shaping behaviour. It can be11used as a tool to exercise control over us like the ‘big brother’ State

        exercised. This can have a stultifying effect on the expression of dissent

        and difference of opinion, which no democracy can afford.

20.       Thus, there is an unprecedented need for regulation regarding

        the extent to which such information can be stored, processed and used

        by non-state actors. There is also a need for protection of such

        information from the State. Our Government was successful in

        compelling Blackberry to give to it the ability to intercept data sent over

        Blackberry devices. While such interception may be desirable and

        permissible in order to ensure national security, it cannot be

        unregulated.8

21.       The concept of ‘invasion of privacy’ is not the early conventional

        thought process of ‘poking ones nose in another person’s affairs’. It is

        not so simplistic. In today’s world, privacy is a limit on the government’s

        power as well as the power of private sector entities.98Kadhim Shubber, Blackberry gives Indian Government ability to intercept messages published by Wired on 11 July,
2013 http://www.wired.co.uk/article/blackberry-india9Daniel Solove, ’10 Reasons Why Privacy Matters’ published on January 20, 2014
https://www.teachprivacy.com/10-reasons-privacy-matters/12

22.     George Orwell created a fictional State in ‘Nineteen Eighty-Four.’

Today, it can be a reality. The technological development today can

enable not only the state, but also big corporations and private entities

to be the ‘big brother’.

The Constitution of India - A Living Document

23.     The   Constitutional jurisprudence of       all democracies in the

world, in some way or the other, refer to ‘the brooding spirit of the law’,

‘the collective conscience’, ‘the intelligence of a future day’, ‘the heaven

of freedom’ , etc. The spirit is justice for all, being the cherished value.

24.     This spirit displays many qualities, and has myriad ways of

expressing herself – at times she was liberty, at times dignity. She was

equality, she was fraternity, reasonableness and fairness. She was in

Athens during the formative years of the demoscratos and she

manifested herself in England as the Magna Carta. Her presence was felt

in France during the Revolution, in America when it was being founded

and in South Africa during the times of Mandela.

25.       In our country, she inspired our founding fathers – The Sovereign,

Socialist, Secular Democratic Republic of India was founded on her very

spirit.

26.       During the times of the Constituent Assembly, the great

intellectuals of the day sought to give this brooding spirit a form, and

sought to invoke her in a manner that they felt could be understood,

applied and interpreted – they drafted the Indian Constitution.

27.       In it they poured her essence, and gave to her a grand throne in

Part III of the Indian Constitution.

28.       The document that they created had her everlasting blessings,

every part of the Constitution resonates with the spirit of Justice and what

it stands for: ‘peaceful, harmonious and orderly social living’. The

Constitution stands as a codified representation of the great spirit of

Justice itself. It is because it represents that Supreme Goodness that it has

been conferred the status of the Grundnorm, that it is the Supreme Legal

Document in the country.

29.       The Constitution was not drafted for a specific time period or for a

certain generation, it was drafted to stand firm, for eternity. It sought to14create a Montesquian framework that would endear in both war time and

           in peace time and in Ambedkar’s famous words, “if things go wrong under

           the new Constitution the reason will not be that we had a bad

           Constitution. What we will have to say is that Man was vile.”10

30.     It has already outlived its makers, and will continue to outlive our

           generation, because it contains within its core, a set of undefinable values

           and ideals that are eternal in nature. It is because it houses these values

           so cherished by mankind that it lives for eternity, as a Divine Chiranjeevi.

31.     The Constitution, importantly, was also drafted for the purpose of

           assisting and at all times supporting this ‘peaceful, harmonious and

           orderly social living’. The Constitution thus lives for the people. Its deepest

           wishes are that civil society flourishes and there is a peaceful social order.

           Any change in the sentiments of the people are recognised by it. It seeks

           to incorporate within its fold all possible civil rights which existed in the

           past, and those rights which may appear on the horizon of the future. It

           endears. The Constitution was never intended to serve as a means to stifle

           the protection of the valuable rights of its citizens. Its aim and purpose

           was completely the opposite.

Dhananjay Keer, Dr.Ambedkar: Life and Mission, Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1971 [1954], p.410.)15

32.     The founders of the Constitution, were aware of the fact that the

          Constitution would need alteration to keep up with the mores and trends

          of the age. This was precisely the reason that an unrestricted amending

          power was sought to be incorporated in the text of the Constitution in

          Part 20 underArticle 368.The very incorporation of such a plenary power

          in a separate part altogether is prima facie proof that the Constitution,

          even during the times of its making was intended to be a timeless

          document, eternal in nature, organic and living.

33.     Therefore, the theory of original intent itself supports the stand that

          the original intention of the makers of the Constitutional was to ensure

          that     it   does   not    get    weighed     down     by    the   originalist

          interpretations/remain static/fossilised, but changes and evolves to suit

          the felt need of the times. The original intention theory itself

          contemplates a Constitution which is organic in nature.

34.     The then Chief Justice of India, Patanjali Sastri, in theState of West

          Bengal vs. Anwar Ali Sarkar11observed as follows:

35.     How the Constitution should be read and interpreted is best found

           in the words of Khanna,J., inKesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala12as

           follows:

A Constitution, it needs to be emphasised, is not a
document for fastidious dialectics but the means of
ordering the life of a people. It had (sic) its roots in the
past, its continuity is reflected in the present and it is
intended for the unknown future. The words of Holmes
while dealing with the U.S. Constitution have equal
relevance for our Constitution. Said the great Judge:

36.      In the same judgment, K.K. Mathew, J., observed :

37.In the context of the necessity of the doctrine of flexibility while

           dealing with the Constitution, it was observed inUnion of India vs. Naveen

           Jindal13:

While doing so, the Constitutional courts are not only
       required to take into consideration their own experience
       over the time, the international treaties and covenants but
       also keeping the doctrine of flexibility in mind. This Court
       times without number has extended the scope and extent
       of the provisions of the fundamental rights, having regard
       to several factors including the intent and purport of the
       Constitution-makers as reflected in Parts IV and IV-A of the
       Constitution of India.”

38.    The document itself, though inked in a parched paper of timeless

value, never grows old. Its ideals and values forever stay young and

energetic, forever changing with the times. It represents the pulse and

soul of the nation and like a phoenix, grows and evolves, but at the same

time remains young and malleable.

39.   The notions of goodness, fairness, equality and dignity can never

be satisfactorily defined, they can only be experienced. They are felt.

They were let abstract for the reason that these rights, by their very

nature, are not static. They can never be certainly defined or applied, for

they change not only with time, but also with situations. The same

concept can be differently understood, applied and interpreted and

therein lies their beauty and their importance. This multiplicity of

interpretation and application is the very core which allows them to be20differently understood and applied in changing social and cultural

situations.

40.     Therefore, these core values, these core principles, are all various

facets of the spirit that pervades our Constitution and they apply and

read differently in various scenarios. They manifest themselves differently

in different ages, situations and conditions. Though being rooted in

ancient Constitutional principles, they find mention and applicability as

different rights and social privileges. They appear differently, based on

the factual circumstance. Privacy, for example is nothing but a form of

dignity, which itself is a subset of liberty.

41.     Thus, from the one great tree, there are branches, and from

these branches there are sub-branches and leaves. Every one of these

leaves are rights, all tracing back to the tree of justice. They are all

equally important and of equal need in the great social order. They

together form part of that ‘great brooding spirit’. Denial of one of them

is the denial of the whole, for these rights, in manner of speaking,

fertilise and nurture each other.

42. What is beautiful in this biological, organic growth is this: While the

tree appears to be great and magnificent, apparently incapable of further

growth, there are always new branches appearing, new leaves and buds

growing. These new rights, are the rights of future generations that

evolve over the passage of time to suit and facilitate the civility of

posterity. They are equally part of this tree of rights and equally trace

their origins to those natural rights which we are all born with. These

leaves, sprout and grow with the passage of time, just as certain rights

may get weeded out due to natural evolution.

43.    At this juncture of time, we are incapable and it is nigh impossible

to anticipate and foresee what these new buds may be. There can be no

certainty in making this prediction. However, what remains certain is that

there will indeed be a continual growth of the great tree that we call the

Constitution. This beautiful aspect of the document is what makes it

organic, dynamic, young and everlasting. And it is important that the tree

grows further, for the Republic finds a shade under its branches.

44.   The challenges to protect privacy have increased manifold. The

observations made in the context of the need for law to change, by22Bhagwati, J., as he then was, inNational Textile Workers Union Vs. P.R.14Ramakrishnanwould equally apply to          the    requirements    of

            interpretation of the Constitution in the present context:

45.     It is wrong to consider that the concept of the supervening spirit of

           justice manifesting in different forms to cure the evils of a new age is

           unknown to Indian history. Lord Shri Krishna declared in Chapter 4 Text 8 of

           The Bhagavad Gita thus:

46.   The meaning of this profound statement, when viewed after a

thousand generations is this: That each age and each generation brings with

it the challenges and tribulations of the times. But that Supreme spirit of

Justice manifests itself in different eras, in different continents and in

different social situations, as different values to ensure that there always

exists the protection and preservation of certain eternally cherished rights

and ideals. It is a reflection of this divine ‘Brooding spirit of the law’, ‘the

collective conscience’, ‘the intelligence of a future day’ that has found

mention in the ideals enshrined in inter- alia,Article 14and21, which

together serve as the heart stones of the Constitution. The spirit that finds

enshrinement in these articles manifests and reincarnates itself in ways

and forms that protect the needs of the society in various ages, as the

values of liberty, equality, fraternity, dignity, and various other

Constitutional values, Constitutional principles. It always grows stronger

and covers within its sweep the great needs of the times. This spirit can

neither remain dormant nor static and can never be allowed to fossilise.

47.   An issue like privacy could never have been anticipated to acquire

such a level of importance when the Constitution was being contemplated.24Yet, today, the times we live in necessitate that it be recognised not only as

a valuable right, but as a right Fundamental in Constitutional jurisprudence.

48.   There are sure to be times in the future, similar to our experience

today, perhaps as close as 10 years from today or as far off as a 100 years,

when we will debate and deliberate whether a certain right is fundamental

or not. At that time it must be understood that the Constitution was always

meant to be an accommodative and all-encompassing document, framed to

cover in its fold all those rights that are most deeply cherished and required

for a ‘peaceful, harmonious and orderly social living.

49.   The Constitution and its all-encompassing spirit forever grows, but

never ages.

Privacy is essential to liberty and dignity

50.   Rohinton F. Nariman, J., and Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud J., have

emphasized the importance of the protection of privacy to ensure

protection of liberty and dignity. I agree with them and seek to refer to

some legal observations in this regard:

51.       Lord Nicholls and Lord Hoffmann in their opinion in Naomi

          Campbell’s case16 recognized the importance of the protection of privacy.


           Lord Hoffman opined as under:

52. Privacy is also the key to freedom of thought. A person has a right to

think. The thoughts are sometimes translated into speech but confined to

the person to whom it is made. For example, one may want to criticize

someone but not share the criticism with the world.

Privacy – Right To Control Information

53.    I had earlier adverted to an aspect of privacy – the right to

control dissemination of personal information. The boundaries that

people establish from others in society are not only physical but also

informational. There are different kinds of boundaries in respect to

different relations.   Privacy assists in preventing awkward social

situations and reducing social frictions. Most of the information about

individuals can fall under the phrase “none of your business”. On

information being shared voluntarily, the same may be said to be in

confidence and any breach of confidentiality is a breach of the trust.

This is more so in the professional relationships such as with doctors and

lawyers which requires an element of candor in disclosure of

information. An individual has the right to control one’s life while

submitting personal data for various facilities and services. It is but

essential that the individual knows as to what the data is being used for

with the ability to correct and amend it. The hallmark of freedom in a

democracy is having the autonomy and control over our lives which28becomes impossible, if important decisions are made in secret without

        our awareness or participation.17

54.       Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J., notes that recognizing a zone of privacy

        is but an acknowledgement that each individual must be entitled to

        chart and pursue the course of development of their personality.

        Rohinton F. Nariman,J., recognizes informational privacy which

        recognizes that an individual may have control over the dissemination of

        material which is personal to him. Recognized thus, from the right to

        privacy in this modern age emanate certain other rights such as the right

        of individuals to exclusively commercially exploit their identity and

        personal information, to control the information that is available about

        them on the ‘world wide web’ and to disseminate certain personal

        information for limited purposes alone.

55.       Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis in 1890 expressed the belief

        that an individual should control the degree and type of private –

        personal information that is made public :

17

56.       An individual has a right to protect his reputation from being

        unfairly harmed and such protection of reputation needs to exist not

        only against falsehood but also certain truths. It cannot be said that a

        more accurate judgment about people can be facilitated by knowing

        private details about their lives – people judge us badly, they judge us in

        haste, they judge out of context, they judge without hearing the whole

        story and they judge with hypocrisy.                       Privacy lets people protect

        themselves from these troublesome judgments18.

57.       There is no justification for making all truthful information

        available to the public. The public does not have an interest in knowing18Daniel Solove, ’10 Reasons Why Privacy Matters’ published on January 20, 2014
https://www.teachprivacy.com/10-reasons-privacy-matters/30all information that is true. Which celebrity has had sexual relationships

         with whom might be of interest to the public but has no element of

         public interest and may therefore be a breach of privacy.19 Thus, truthful

         information that breaches privacy may also require protection.

58.       Every individual should have a right to be able to exercise control

         over his/her own life and image as portrayed to the world and to control

         commercial use of his/her identity. This also means that an individual

         may be permitted to prevent others from using his image, name and

         other aspects of his/her personal life and identity for commercial

         purposes without his/her consent.20

59. Aside from the economic justifications for such a right, it is also

         justified as protecting individual autonomy and personal dignity. The

         right protects an individual’s free, personal conception of the ‘self.’ The

         right of publicity implicates a person’s interest in autonomous self-19The UK Courts granted in super-injunctions to protect privacy of certain celebrities by tabloids which meant that
not only could the private information not be published but the very fact of existence of that case & injunction
could also not be published.

20The Second Circuit’s decision in Haelan Laboratories v. Topps Chewing Gum. 202 F.2d 866 (2d Cir. 1953) penned
by Judge Jerome Frank defined the right to publicity as “the right to grant the exclusive privilege of publishing his
picture”.

definition, which prevents others from interfering with the meanings

        and values that the public associates with her.21

60. Prosser categorized the invasion of privacy into four separate torts22:

61.       In the poetic words of Felicia Lamport mentioned in the book

        “The Assault on Privacy24” :

62.   The right of an individual to exercise control over his personal

data and to be able to control his/her own life would also encompass

his right to control his existence on the internet. Needless to say that

this would not be an absolute right.The existence of such a right does

not imply that a criminal can obliterate his past, but that there are

variant degrees of mistakes, small and big, and it cannot be said that a

person should be profiled to the nth extent for all and sundry to know.

63.   A high school teacher was fired after posting on her Facebook

page that she was “so not looking forward to another [school] year”

since that the school district’s residents were “arrogant and snobby”. A

flight attended was fired for posting suggestive photos of herself in the33company’s uniform.25 In the pre-digital era, such incidents would have

             never occurred. People could then make mistakes and embarrass

             themselves, with the comfort that the information will be typically

             forgotten over time.

64. The impact of the digital age results in information on the internet

             being permanent. Humans forget, but the internet does not forget and

             does not let humans forget. Any endeavour to remove information

             from the internet does not result in its absolute obliteration. The foot

             prints remain. It is thus, said that in the digital world preservation is

             the norm and forgetting a struggle26.

65. The technology results almost in a sort of a permanent storage in

             some way or the other making it difficult to begin life again giving up

             past mistakes. People are not static, they change and grow through

             their lives. They evolve. They make mistakes. But they are entitled to

             re-invent themselves and reform and correct their mistakes. It is25Patricia Sánchez Abril, Blurred Boundaries: Social Media Privacy and the Twenty-First-Century Employee, 49 AM.
BUS. L.J. 63, 69 (2012).

Ravi Antani, THE RESISTANCE OF MEMORY : COULD THE EUROPEAN UNION’S RIGHT TO BE FORGOTTEN EXIST IN
THE UNITED STATES ?

privacy which nurtures this ability and removes the shackles of

             unadvisable things which may have been done in the past.

66. Children around the world create perpetual digital footprints on

             social network websites on a 24/7 basis as they learn their ‘ABCs’:

67. People change and an individual should be able to determine the

             path of his life and not be stuck only on a path of which he/she treaded

             initially. An individual should have the capacity to change his/her

             beliefs and evolve as a person. Individuals should not live in fear that

             the views they expressed will forever be associated with them and thus

             refrain from expressing themselves.

27Michael L. Rustad, Sanna Kulevska, Reconceptualizing the right to be forgotten to enable transatlantic data flow,
28 Harv. J.L. & Tech. 34935

68. Whereas this right to control dissemination of personal

             information in the physical and virtual space should not amount to a

             right of total eraser of history, this right, as a part of the larger right of

             privacy, has to be balanced against other fundamental rights like the

             freedom of expression, or freedom of media, fundamental to a

             democratic society.

69. Thus, The European Union Regulation of 201628 has recognized

             what has been termed as ‘the right to be forgotten’. This does not

             mean that all aspects of earlier existence are to be obliterated, as some

             may have a social ramification. If we were to recognize a similar right, it

             would only mean that an individual who is no longer desirous of his

             personal data to be processed or stored, should be able to remove it

             from the system where the personal data/ information is no longer

             necessary, relevant, or is incorrect and serves no legitimate interest.

             Such a right cannot be exercised where the information/ data is

             necessary, for exercising the right of freedom of expression and

             information, for compliance with              legal obligations, for the28Supra36performance of a task carried out in public interest, on the grounds of

              public interest in the area of public health, for archiving purposes in

              the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or

              statistical purposes, or for the establishment, exercise or defence of

              legal claims. Such justifications would be valid in all cases of breach of

              privacy, including breaches of data privacy.

Data Regulation

70. I agree with Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J., that formulation of data

              protection is a complex exercise which needs to be undertaken by the

              State after a careful balancing of privacy concerns and legitimate State

              interests, including public benefit arising from scientific and historical

              research based on data collected and processed. The European Union

              Regulation of 201629 of the European Parliament and of the Council of

              27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the

              processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data

              may provide useful guidance in this regard. The State must ensure that29Supra37information is not used without the consent of users and that it is used

 for the purpose and to the extent it was disclosed. Thus, for e.g. , if the

 posting on social media websites is meant only for a certain audience,

 which is possible as per tools available, then it cannot be said that all

 and sundry in public have a right to somehow access that information

 and make use of it.

Test: Principle of Proportionality and Legitimacy

71. The concerns expressed on behalf of the petitioners arising from

 the possibility of the State infringing the right to privacy can be met by

 the test suggested for limiting the discretion of the State:

72.    The right to privacy as already observed is not absolute. The right

             to privacy as falling in part III of the Constitution may, depending on its

             variable facts, vest in one part or the other, and would thus be subject

             to the restrictions of exercise of that particular fundamental right.

             National security would thus be an obvious restriction, so would the

             provisos to different fundamental rights, dependent on where the right

             to privacy would arise. The Public interest element would be another

             aspect.

73.    It would be useful to turn to The European Union Regulation of

             201630 . Restrictions of the right to privacy may be justifiable in the

             following circumstances subject to the principle of proportionality:

Report of Group of Experts on Privacy

74.    It is not as if the aspect of privacy has not met with concerns. The

             Planning Commission of India constituted the Group of Experts on Privacy31Supra40under the Chairmanship of Justice A.P. Shah, which submitted a report on

16 October, 2012.       The five salient features, in his own words, are as

follows:

CONCLUSION

77.   The right of privacy is a fundamental right. It is a right which

protects the inner sphere of the individual from interference from both

State, and non-State actors and allows the individuals to make

autonomous life choices.

78.   It was rightly expressed on behalf of the petitioners that the

technology has made it possible to enter a citizen’s house without

knocking at his/her door and this is equally possible both by the State and

non-State actors. It is an individual’s choice as to who enters his house,

how he lives and in what relationship. The privacy of the home must

protect the family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation which are

all important aspects of dignity.

79.   If the individual permits someone to enter the house it does not

mean that others can enter the house.      The only check and balance is

that it should not harm the other individual or affect his or her rights.

This applies both to the physical form and to technology. In an era where

there are wide, varied, social and cultural norms and more so in a country

like ours which prides itself on its diversity, privacy is one of the most44important rights to be protected both against State and non-State actors

           and be recognized as a fundamental right. How it thereafter works out in

           its inter-play with other fundamental rights and when such restrictions

           would become necessary would depend on the factual matrix of each

           case. That it may give rise to more litigation can hardly be the reason not

           to recognize this important, natural, primordial right as a fundamental

           right.

80.        There are two aspects of the opinion of Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud,J.,

           one of which is common to the opinion of Rohinton F. Nariman,J.,

           needing specific mention.           While considering the evolution of

           Constitutional jurisprudence on the right of privacy he has referred to the

           judgment inSuresh Kumar Koushal Vs. Naz Foundation.32 Inthe challenge

           laid toSection 377of the Indian Penal Code before the Delhi High Court,

           one of the grounds of challenge was that the said provision amounted to

           an infringement of the right to dignity and privacy. The Delhi High Court,

           inter alia, observed that the right to live with dignity and the right of

           privacy both are recognized as dimensions ofArticle 21of the

           Constitution of India. The view of the High Court, however did not find32(2014) 1 SCC 145favour with the Supreme Court and it was observed that only a miniscule

          fraction of the country’s population constitutes lesbians, gays, bisexuals

          or transgenders and thus, there cannot be any basis for declaring the

          Section ultra virus of provisions ofArticles 14, 15and21of the

          Constitution. The matter did not rest at this, as the issue of privacy and

          dignity discussed by the High Court was also observed upon. The sexual

          orientation even within the four walls of the house thus became an

          aspect of debate.     I am in agreement with the view of Dr. D.Y.

          Chandrachud, J., who in paragraphs 123 & 124 of his judgment, states

          that the right of privacy cannot be denied, even if there is a miniscule

          fraction of the population which is affected. The majoritarian concept

          does not apply to Constitutional rights and the Courts are often called up

          on to take what may be categorized as a non-majoritarian view, in the

          check and balance of power envisaged under the Constitution of India.

          Ones sexual orientation is undoubtedly an attribute of privacy.The

          observations made in Mosley vs. News Group Papers Ltd. 33, in a broader

          concept may be usefully referred to:

33

131.      When the courts identify an infringement of a
       person’sArticle 8rights, and in particular in the context of
       his freedom to conduct his sex life and personal
       relationships as he wishes, it is right to afford a remedy and
       to vindicate that right. The only permitted exception is
       where there is a countervailing public interest which in the
       particular circumstances is strong enough to outweigh it;
       that is to say, because one at least of the established
       “limiting principles” comes into play. Was it necessary and
       proportionate for the intrusion to take place, for example,
       in order to expose illegal activity or to prevent the public
       from being significantly misled by public claims hitherto
       made by the individual concerned (as with Naomi
       Campbell’s public denials of drug-taking)? Or was it
       necessary because the information, in the words of the
       Strasbourg court in Von Hannover at (60) and (76), would
       make a contribution to “a debate of general interest”? That
       is, of course, a very high test, it is yet to be determined how
       far that doctrine will be taken in the courts of this
       jurisdiction in relation to photography in public places. If
       taken literally, it would mean a very significant change in
       what is permitted. It would have a profound effect on the
       tabloid and celebrity culture to which we have become
       accustomed in recent years.”

81.   It is not necessary to delve into this issue further, other than in the

context of privacy as that would be an issue to be debated before the

appropriate Bench, the matter having been referred to a larger Bench.47

82.     The second aspect is the discussion in respect of the majority

           judgment in the case of ADM Jabalpur vs. Shivkant Shukla34 in both the

           opinions.InI.R. Coelho Vs. The State of Tamil Nadu35it was observed

           that the ADM Jabalpur case has been impliedly overruled and that the

           supervening event was the 44th Amendment to the Constitution,

           amendingArticle 359of the Constitution.I fully agree with the view

           expressly overruling the ADM Jabalpur case which was an aberration in

           the constitutional jurisprudence of our country and the desirability of

           burying the majority opinion ten fathom deep, with no chance of

           resurrection.

83.     Let the right of privacy, an inherent right, be unequivocally a

           fundamental right embedded in part-III of the Constitution of India, but

           subject to the restrictions specified, relatable to that part. This is the call

           of today. The old order changeth yielding place to new.

……………………………………..J.
                                                                (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)
           New Delhi
           August 24 , 2017.

34(1976) 2 SCC 52135(2007) 2 SCC 1
                                                 REPORTABLE



                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION



             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO 494 OF 2012




JUSTICE K.S.PUTTASWAMY (RETD.),
AND ANR.                                     ..Petitioners

                              VERSUS


UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                      ..Respondents


WITH


T.C. (CIVIL) NO 151 OF 2013


T.C. (CIVIL) NO 152 OF 2013


W.P.(CIVIL) NO 833 OF 2013


W.P.(CIVIL) NO 829 OF 2013


W.P.(CIVIL) NO 932 OF 20131CONMT. PET. (CIVIL) NO 144 OF 2014 IN W.P.(C)NO.494/2012


T.P.(CIVIL) NO 313 OF 2014

T.P.(CIVIL) NO 312 OF 2014S.L.P(CRL.)NO.2524/2014W.P.(CIVIL)NO.37/2015W.P.(CIVIL)NO.220/2015CONMT. PET. (C)NO.674/2015 IN W.P.(C)NO.829/2013T.P.(CIVIL)NO.921/2015CONMT.PET.(C)NO.470/2015 IN W.P.(C)NO.494/2012


CONMT.PET.(C)NO.444/2016 IN W.P.(C)NO.494/2012

CONMT.PET.(C)NO.608/2016 IN W.P.(C)NO.494/2012W.P.(CIVIL)NO.797/2016CONMT.PET.(C)NO.844/2017 IN W.P.(C)NO.494/2012W.P.(C) NO.342/2017AND WITH W.P.(C)NO.000372/20172ORDER OF THE COURT




1      The judgment on behalf of the Hon’ble Chief Justice Shri Justice Jagdish

Singh Khehar, Shri Justice R K Agrawal, Shri Justice S Abdul Nazeer and Dr

Justice D Y Chandrachud was delivered by Dr Justice D Y Chandrachud. Shri

Justice J Chelameswar, Shri Justice S A Bobde, Shri Justice Abhay Manohar

Sapre, Shri Justice Rohinton Fali Nariman and Shri Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul

delivered separate judgments.

2      The reference is disposed of in the following terms:

........................................................CJI
                                                   [JAGDISH SINGH KHEHAR]



                                                  ……...….............................................J
                                                   [J CHELAMESWAR]


                                                  ..…….................................................J
                                                    [S A BOBDE]



                                                   .........................................................J
                                                    [R K AGRAWAL]



                                                  ….…..................................................J
                                                  [ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN]



                                                  ….……...............................................J
                                                   [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]



                                                 ............................................................J
                                                    [Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD]



                                                 ............................................................J
                                                   [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


                                                ….........................................................J
                                                 [S ABDUL NAZEER]
New Delhi;

AUGUST 24, 20174