--- Judgment Metadata ---
Title: Navtej Singh Johar vs Union Of India Ministry Of Law And ... on 6 September, 2018
Document ID: 168671544
Source URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/168671544/
Court: Supreme Court of India
Bench: Bench:Chief Justice,Rohinton Fali Nariman,A.M. Khanwilkar,D.Y. Chandrachud,Indu Malhotra
Date of Judgment: 6 September, 2018
Petitioner(s): Navtej Singh Johar
Respondent(s): Union Of India Ministry Of Law And ...
Citations: Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4321, AIR 2018 SC( CRI) 1169, (2018) 4 MAD LJ(CRI) 306, (2018) 4 BOMCR(CRI) 289, (2018) 10 SCALE 386, 2019 (1) SCC (CRI) 1, (2018) 4 CURCRIR 1, (2018) 105 ALLCRIC 258, (2018) 3 ALLCRIR 3234, (2018) 3 CRIMES 233, 2018 (10) SCC 1, 2018 (190) AIC (SOC) 1 (SC), 252 (2018) DLT 1 (CN)(SC), 2018 (3) KCCR SN 325 (SC), 2018 (4) KLT SN 1 (KER), AIRONLINE 2018 SC 146

--- Judgment Content ---

Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Member Services--Sign up todayand get free trial for one month.

Dipak Misra, CJI (for himself and A.M. Khanwilkar, J.)


                                                  CONTENTS
                      S. No(s).                      Heading                      Page No(s)Signature Not VerifiedA.       Introduction…………………………………………                       3-11Digitally signed byCHETAN KUMARThe Reference………………………………………
Date: 2018.09.06
15:12:35 IST
Reason:                  B.                                                         11-152C.   Submissions on behalf of the petitioners……       15-30

D.   Submissions on behalf of the respondents
     and other intervenors.………………………….…               31-44

E.   Decisions in Naz Foundation and Suresh
     Koushal………………..……………………………..                     45-48

F.   Other judicial pronouncements onSection 377IPC ……………………….…………………………..                       48-57

G.   The Constitution – an organic charter of
     progressive rights…………………………………                  57-64

H.   Transformative constitutionalism and the
     rights of LGBT community……………………….               65-74

I.   Constitutional morality andSection 377IPC….    74-81

J.   Perspective of human dignity……………………             81-89

K.   Sexual orientation………………………………….                 89-96

L.   Privacy and its concomitant aspects…………...      96-111

M.   Doctrine of progressive realization of
     rights………………………………………………….                      111-118

N.   International perspective………………………….             118

(i)     United States………………………………               118-122

(ii)    Canada……………………………………..                  123-125(iii)   South Africa……………………………….                125

(iv)    United Kingdom………………………….               126-127

(v)     Other Courts/Jurisdictions……………..       127-1293O.       Comparative analysis ofSection 375andSection 377IPC………………………………….…                              129-140

P.       The litmus test for survival ofSection 377IPC…….………………………………………………                                    140-156

Q.       Conclusions…………………………………………                                 156-166



A.    Introduction


      Not for nothing, the great German thinker, Johann Wolfgang

von Goethe, had said, ―I am what I am, so take me as I am‖ and

similarly, Arthur Schopenhauer had pronounced, ―No one can escape

from their individuality‖. In this regard, it is profitable to quote a few

lines from John Stuart Mill:-

2.    Shakespeare through one of his characters in a play says

―What‘s in a name? That which we call a rose by any other name

would smell as sweet‖. The said phrase, in its basic sense, conveys

that what really matters is the essential qualities of the substance and

the fundamental characteristics of an entity but not the name by

which it or a person is called. Getting further deeper into the meaning,

it is understood that the name may be a convenient concept for

identification but the essence behind the same is the core of identity.

Sans identity, the name only remains a denotative term. Therefore,

the identity is pivotal to one‘s being. Life bestows honour on it and

freedom of living, as a facet of life, expresses genuine desire to have

it. The said desire, one is inclined to think, is satisfied by the

conception of constitutional recognition, and hence, emphasis is laid

on the identity of an individual which is conceived under the

Constitution. And the sustenance of identity is the filament of life. It is

equivalent to authoring one‘s own life script where freedom broadens

everyday. Identity is equivalent to divinity.5

3.    The overarching ideals of individual autonomy and liberty,

equality for all sans discrimination of any kind, recognition of identity

with dignity and privacy of human beings constitute the cardinal four

corners of our monumental Constitution forming the concrete

substratum of our fundamental rights that has eluded certain sections

of our society who are still living in the bondage of dogmatic social

norms, prejudiced notions, rigid stereotypes, parochial mindset and

bigoted perceptions. Social exclusion, identity seclusion and isolation

from the social mainstream are still the stark realities faced by

individuals today and it is only when each and every individual is

liberated from the shackles of such bondage and is able to work

towards full development of his/her personality that we can call

ourselves a truly free society.    The first step on the long path to

acceptance of the diversity and variegated hues that nature has

created has to be taken now by vanquishing the enemies of prejudice

and injustice and undoing the wrongs done so as to make way for a

progressive and inclusive realisation of social and economic rights

embracing all and to begin a dialogue for ensuring equal rights and

opportunities for the ―less than equal‖ sections of the society. We

have to bid adieu to the perceptions, stereotypes and prejudices6deeply ingrained in the societal mindset so as to usher in inclusivity in

all spheres and empower all citizens alike without any kind of

alienation and discrimination.

4.        The natural identity of an individual should be treated to be

absolutely essential to his being. What nature gives is natural. That

is called nature within. Thus, that part of the personality of a person

has to be respected and not despised or looked down upon. The said

inherent nature and the associated natural impulses in that regard are

to be accepted. Non-acceptance of it by any societal norm or notion

and punishment by law on some obsolete idea and idealism affects

the kernel of the identity of an individual. Destruction of individual

identity would tantamount to crushing of intrinsic dignity that

cumulatively encapsulates the values of privacy, choice, freedom of

speech and other expressions. It can be viewed from another angle.

An individual in exercise of his choice may feel that he/she should be

left alone but no one, and we mean, no one, should impose solitude

on him/her.

5.        The eminence of identity has been luculently stated inNational

Legal Services Authority v. Union of Indiaand others1, popularly


1   (2014) 5 SCC 4387known as NALSA case, wherein the Court was dwelling upon the

status of identity of the transgenders. Radhakrishnan, J., after

referring to catena of judgments and certain International Covenants,

opined that gender identity is one of the most fundamental aspects of

life which refers to a person‘s intrinsic sense of being male, female or

transgender or transsexual person. A person‘s sex is usually

assigned at birth, but a relatively small group of persons may be born

with bodies which incorporate both or certain aspects of both male

and female physiology. The learned Judge further observed that at

times, genital anatomy problems may arise in certain persons in the

sense that their innate perception of themselves is not in conformity

with the sex assigned to them at birth and may include pre-and post-

operative transsexual persons and also persons who do not choose

to undergo or do not have access to operation and also include

persons who cannot undergo successful operation. Elaborating

further, he said:-

2   (2014) 1 SCC 1
3   (2009) 111 DRJ 11208.01.2018, the Court referred to a two-Judge Bench decision

rendered inSuresh Koushal(supra) wherein this Court had

overturned the decision rendered by the Division Bench of the Delhi

High Court inNaz Foundation(supra).It was submitted by Mr.

Arvind Datar, learned senior counsel appearing for the writ

petitioners, on the said occasion that the two-Judge Bench inSuresh

Koushal(supra) had been guided by social morality leaning on

majoritarian perception whereas the issue, in actuality, needed to be

debated upon in the backdrop of constitutional morality.A contention

was also advanced that the interpretation placed inSuresh Kumar(supra) uponArticle 21of the Constitution is extremely narrow and, in

fact, the Court has been basically guided byArticle 14of the

Constitution.Reliance was placed on the pronouncement in NALSA

case wherein this Court had emphasized on ―gender identity and

sexual orientation‖.Attention of this Court was also invited to a nine-

Judge Bench decision inK.S. Puttaswamy and another v. Union of4India        and      otherswherein the majority, speaking through

Chandrachud, J., has opined that sexual orientation is an essential

component of rights guaranteed under the Constitution which are not


4   (2017) 10 SCC 113formulated on majoritarian favour or acceptance.Kaul, J, in his

concurring opinion, referred to the decision in Mosley v. News5Group Newspapers Ltd.             to highlight that the emphasis for

individual‘s freedom to conduct his sex life and personal relationships

as he wishes, subject to the permitted exceptions, countervails public

interest.

11.       The further submission that was advanced by Mr. Datar was

that privacy of the individual having been put on such a high pedestal

and sexual orientation having been emphasized in the NALSA case,Section 377IPC cannot be construed as a reasonable restriction as

that would have the potentiality to destroy the individual autonomy

and sexual orientation. It is an accepted principle of interpretation of

statutes that a provision does not become unconstitutional merely

because there can be abuse of the same. Similarly, though a

provision on the statute book is not invoked on many occasions, yet it

does not fall into the sphere of the doctrine of desuetude.However,

Suresh Koushal's case has been guided by the aforesaid doctrine of

desuetude.

5   [2008] EWHC 1777 (QB)14

12.   Appreciating the said submissions, the three-Judge Bench

stated that:-

But that law must have the acceptability of the
      Constitutional parameters. That is the litmus test.

It is necessary to note, in the course of hearing
      on a query being made and Mr. Datar very fairly stated
      that he does not intend to challenge that part ofSection 377which relates to carnal intercourse with
      animals and that apart, he confines to consenting acts
      between two adults. As far as the first aspect is
      concerned, that is absolutely beyond debate. As far as
      the second aspect is concerned, that needs to be
      debated. The consent between two adults has to be
      the primary pre-condition. Otherwise the children
      would become prey, and protection of the children in
      all spheres has to be guarded and protected. Taking all
      the apsects in a cumulative manner, we are of the15view, the decision inSuresh Kumar Koushal's case
      (supra) requires re-consideration.‖

      The three-Judge Bench expressed the opinion that the issues

raised should be answered by a larger Bench and, accordingly,

referred the matter to the larger Bench.That is how the matter has

been placed before us.

C.    Submissions on behalf of the petitioners

13.   We have heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel

assisted by Mr. Saurabh Kirpal, learned counsel appearing for the

petitioners in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 76 of 2016, Ms. Jayna

Kothari, learned counsel for the petitioner in Writ Petition (Civil) No.

572 of 2016, Mr. Arvind P. Datar, learned senior counsel for the

petitioner in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 88 of 2018, Mr. Anand

Grover, learned senior counsel for the petitioners in Writ Petition

(Criminal) Nos. 100 of 2018 and 101 of 2018 and Dr. Menaka

Guruswamy, learned counsel for the petitioner in Writ Petition

(Criminal) No. 121 of 2018. We have also heard Mr. Ashok Desai, Mr.

Chander Uday Singh, Mr. Shyam Divan and Mr. Krishnan Venugopal,

learned senior counsel appearing for various intervenors in the

matter. A compilation of written submissions has been filed by the

petitioners as well as the intervenors.

14.     We have heard Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor

General for the Union of India, Mr. K. Radhakrishnan, learned senior

counsel appearing in Interlocutory Application No. 94284 of 2018 in

Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 76 of 2016, Mr. Mahesh Jethmalani,

learned senior counsel appearing in Interlocutory Application No.

91147 in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 76 of 2016, Mr. Soumya

Chakraborty, learned senior counsel appearing in Interlocutory

Application No. 94348 of 2018 in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 76 of

2016, Mr. Manoj V. George, learned counsel appearing for Apostolic

Alliance of Churches & Utkal Christian Council and Dr. Harshvir

Pratap     Sharma,    learned   counsel   appearing    in   Interlocutory

Application No. 93411 of 2018 in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 76 of

2016.

15.     It is submitted on behalf of the petitioners and the intervenors

that homosexuality, bisexuality and other sexual orientations are

equally natural and reflective of expression of choice and inclination

founded on consent of two persons who are eligible in law to express

such consent and it is neither a physical nor a mental illness, rather

they are natural variations of expression and free thinking process

and to make it a criminal offence is offensive of the well established17principles pertaining to individual dignity and decisional autonomy

inherent in the personality of a person, a great discomfort to gender

identity, destruction of the right to privacy which is a pivotal facet ofArticle 21of the Constitution, unpalatable to the highly cherished idea

of freedom and a trauma to the conception of expression of biological

desire which revolves around the pattern of mosaic of true

manifestation of identity. That apart, the phrase ―order of nature‖ is

limited to the procreative concept that may have been conceived as

natural by a systemic conservative approach and such limitations do

not really take note of inborn traits or developed orientations or, for

that matter, consensual acts which relate to responses to series of

free exercise of assertions of one‘s bodily autonomy. It is further

argued that their growth of personality, relation building endeavour to

enter into a live-in relationship or to form an association with a sense

of commonality have become a mirage and the essential desires are

crippled which violatesArticle 19(1)(a)of the Constitution. It is urged

that the American Psychological Association has opined that sexual

orientation is a natural condition and attraction towards the same sex

or opposite sex are both naturally equal, the only difference being

that the same sex attraction arises in far lesser numbers.18

16.       The petitioners have highlighted that the rights of the lesbian,

gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community, who comprise 7-

8% of the total Indian population, need to be recognized and

protected, for sexual orientation is an integral and innate facet of

every individual‘s identity. A person belonging to the said community

does not become an alien to the concept of individual and his

individualism cannot be viewed with a stigma. The impact of sexual

orientation on an individual‘s life is not limited to their intimate lives

but also impacts their family, professional, social and educational life.

As per the petitioners, such individuals (sexual minorities in societies)

need protection more than the heterosexuals so as to enable them to

achieve their full potential and to live freely without fear,

apprehension or trepidation in such a manner that they are not

discriminated against by the society openly or insidiously or by the

State in multifarious ways in matters such as employment, choice of

partner, testamentary rights, insurability, medical treatment in

hospitals and other similar rights arising from live-in relationships

which, after the decision inIndra Sarma v. V.K.V. Sarma6 , is

recognized even by the ―Protection of Women from Domestic


6   (2013) 15 SCC 75519Violence Act, 2005‖ for various kinds of live-in relationships. The

same protection, as per the petitioners, must be accorded to same

sex relationships.

17.   It is urged by the learned counsel for the petitioners that

individuals belonging to the LGBT group suffer discrimination and

abuse throughout their lives due to the existence ofSection 377IPC

which is nothing but a manifestation of a mindset of societal values

prevalent during the Victorian era where sexual activities were

considered mainly for procreation. The said community remains in a

constant state of fear which is not conducive for their growth. It is

contended that they suffer at the hands of law and are also deprived

of the citizenry rights which are protected under the Constitution. The

law should have treated them as natural victims and sensitized the

society towards their plight and laid stress on such victimisation,

however, the reverse is being done due to which a sense of

estrangement and alienation has developed and continues to prevail

amongst the members belonging to the LGBT group. Compulsory

alienation due to stigma and threat is contrary to the fundamental

principle of liberty.

18.   The petitioners have referred to the decision of this Court in

NALSA case wherein transgenders have been recognized as a third

gender apart from male and female and have been given certain

rights. Yet, in view of the existence ofSection 377in theIPC,

consensual activities amongst transgenders would continue to

constitute an offence. Drawing inspiration from the NALSA case, the

petitioners submit that the rights of the LGBT group are not fully

realized and they remain incomplete citizens because their

expression as regards sexuality is not allowed to be pronounced

owing to the criminality attached to the sexual acts between these

persons which deserves to be given a burial and, therefore, the rights

of the LGBT community also need equal, if not more, constitutional

protection. Accordingly, the petitioners are of the view thatSection

377of the IPC be read down qua the LGBT community so as to

confine it only to the offence of bestiality and non-consensual acts in

view of the fact that with the coming into force of theCriminal Law

(Amendment) Act, 2013and theProtection of Children from Sexual

Offences Act, 2012(POCSO Act), the scope of sexual assault has

been widened to include non peno-vaginal sexual assault and also21criminalize non-consensual sexual acts between children thereby

plugging important gaps in the law governing sexual violence in India.

19.   The petitioners have also submitted that Section 377, despite

being a pre-constitutional law, was retained post the Constitution

coming into effect by virtue ofArticle 372of the Constitution, but it

must be noted that the presumption of constitutionality is merely an

evidentiary burden initially on the person seeking to challenge the

vires of a statute and once any violation of fundamental rights or

suspect classification is prima facie shown, then such presumption

has no role. In the case at hand, the petitioners face a violation of

their fundamental rights to an extent which is manifestly clear and it is

a violation which strikes at the very root or substratum of their

existence. The discrimination suffered at the hands of the majority,

the onslaught to their dignity and invasion on the right to privacy is

demonstrably visible and permeates every nook and corner of the

society.

20. It is the argument of the petitioners that Section 377, if retained in

its present form, would involve the violation of, not one but, several

fundamental rights of the LGBTs, namely, right to privacy, right to

dignity, equality, liberty and right to freedom of expression. The22petitioners contend that sexual orientation which is a natural corollary

of gender identity is protected underArticle 21of the Constitution and

any discrimination meted out to the LGBT community on the basis of

sexual orientation would run counter to the mandate provided under

the Constitution and the said view has also gained approval of this

Court in the NALSA case.

21. The petitioners have also relied upon the view inK.S.

Puttaswamy(supra) to advance their argument that sexual

orientation is also an essential attribute of privacy. Therefore,

protection of both sexual orientation and right to privacy of an

individual is extremely important, for without the enjoyment of these

basic   and   fundamental    rights,    individual   identity   may   lose

significance, a sense of trepidation may take over and their existence

would be reduced to mere survival.It is further urged that sexual

orientation and privacy lie at the core of the fundamental rights which

are guaranteed underArticles 14, 19and21of the Constitution and

in the light of the decision inPuttaswamy(supra), it has become

imperative that Section 377 be struck down. It is contended that the

right to privacy has to take within its ambit and sweep the right of

every individual, including LGBTs, to make decisions as per their23choice without the fear that they may be subjected to humiliation or

shunned by the society merely because of a certain choice or manner

of living.

22. Having canvassed with vehemence that sexual orientation is an

important facet of the right to privacy which has been raised to the

pedestal of a cherished right, the learned counsel for the petitioners

have vigorously propounded that sexual autonomy and the right to

choose a partner of one‘s choice is an inherent aspect of the right to

life and right to autonomy.In furtherance of the said view, they have

relied upon the authorities inShakti Vahini v. Union of India and

others7 andShafin Jahan v. Asokan K.M.8 wherein it has been

clearly recognized that an individual‘s exercise of choice in choosing

a partner is a feature of dignity and, therefore, it is protected underArticles 19and21of the Constitution.

23. According to the petitioners, there is no difference between

persons who defy social conventions to enter into inter-religious and

inter-caste marriages and those who choose a same sex partner in

the sense that the society may disapprove of inter-caste or inter-

religious marriages but this Court is for enforcing constitutional rights.

7(2018)  7 SCC 192
8AIR   2018 SC 1933 : 2018 (5) SCALE 42224Similarly, as per the petitioners, even if there is disapproval by the

majority of the sexual orientation or exercise of choice by the LGBT

persons, the Court as the final arbiter of the constitutional rights,

should disregard social morality and uphold and protect constitutional

morality which has been adverted to by this Court in several cases,

includingManoj Narula v. Union of India9, for that is the governing

rule.It is argued that the Delhi High Court inNaz Foundation(supra)

has referred to and analysed the concept of constitutional morality

and ultimately struck downSection 377IPC clearly stating that carnal

intercourse between homosexuals and heterosexuals with consent

cannot be an offence.

24. The LGBT persons cannot, according to the petitioners, be

penalized simply for choosing a same sex partner, for the

constitutional guarantee of choice of partner extends to the LGBT

persons as well. Learned counsel for the petitioners and the

supporting intervenors have submitted that sexual orientation, being

an innate facet of individual identity, is protected under the right to

dignity. To bolster the said argument, reliance has been placed uponFrancis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi9   (2014) 9 SCC 125and others10 andCommon Cause (A Registered Society) v. Union

of Indiaand another11 wherein it was held that the right to life and

liberty, as envisaged underArticle 21, is meaningless unless it

encompasses within its sphere individual dignity and right to dignity

includes the right to carry such functions and activities as would

constitute the meaningful expression of the human self.

25.        It is submitted that Section 377 is an anathema to the concept

of fraternity as enshrined in the Preamble to our Constitution and the

Indian Constitution mandates that we must promote fraternity

amongst the citizens sans which unity shall remain a distant dream.

26. The petitioners have further contended that Section 377 is

violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution as the said Section is vague

in the sense that carnal intercourse against the order of nature is

neither defined in the Section nor in theIPCor, for that matter, any

other law. There is, as per the petitioners, no intelligible differentia or

reasonable classification between natural and unnatural sex as long

as it is consensual in view of the decision of this Court inAnuj Garg

and others v. Hotel Association of Indiaand others12 which lays

down the principle that classification which may have been treated as
10(1981) 1 SCC 608
11(2018) 5 SCC 1
12(2008) 3 SCC 126valid at the time of its adoption may cease to be so on account of

changing social norms.

27. Section 377, as argued by the petitioners, is manifestly arbitrary

and over-broad and for the said purpose, immense inspiration has

been drawn from the principles stated inShayara Bano v. Union of

Indiaand others13 , for making consensual relationship a crime on

the ground that it is against the order of nature suffers from manifest

arbitrariness at the fulcrum.

28.        It is the case of the petitioners that Section 377 violatesArticle

15of the Constitution since there is discrimination inherent in it based

on the sex of a person‘s sexual partner as under Section 376(c) to (e),

a person can be prosecuted for acts done with an opposite sex

partner without her consent, whereas the same acts if done with a

same-sex partner are criminalized even if the partner consents. The

petitioners have drawn the attention of this Court to the Justice J.S

Verma Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law which had

observed that ‗sex‘ occurring inArticle 15includes sexual orientation

and, thus, as per the petitioners, Section 377 is also violative ofArticle 15of the Constitution on this count.

13(2017)   9 SCC 127

29.        It is argued with astuteness that Section 377 has a chilling

effect onArticle 19(1)(a)of the Constitution which protects the

fundamental right of freedom of expression including that of LGBT

persons to express their sexual identity and orientation, through

speech,          choice   of   romantic/sexual   partner,   expression   of

romantic/sexual desire, acknowledgment of relationships or any other

means and that Section 377 constitutes an unreasonable exception

and is thereby not covered underArticle 19(2)of the Constitution. To

buttress the said stance, reliance is placed upon the decision inS.

Khushboo v. Kanniammaland another14 wherein it has been held

that law should not be used in such a manner that it has a chilling

effect on the freedom of speech and expression.Additionally, the

view in NALSA case has also been strongly pressed into service to

emphasize that the said decision clearly spells out that the right underArticle 19(1)(a)includes one‘s right to expression of his/her self-

identified gender which can be expressed through words, action,

behaviour or any other form.

30. The petitioners have also contended that Section 377 violates the

rights of LGBT persons underArticle 19(1)(c)and denies them the


14(2010)   5 SCC 60028right to form associations. Similarly, such persons are hesitant to

register companies to provide benefits to sexual minorities due to the

fear of state action and social stigma. Further, a conviction underSection 377IPC renders such persons ineligible for appointment as a

director of a company.

31.        It is averred thatSection 377IPC, by creating a taint of

criminality, deprives the LGBT persons of their right to reputation

which is a facet of the right to life and liberty of a citizen underArticle

21of the Constitution as observed by this Court inKishore Samrite v.

State of U.P.and others15 andUmesh Kumar v. State of Andhra

Pradeshand another16 to the effect that reputation is an element of

personal security and protected by the Constitution with the right to

enjoyment of life and liberty. This right, as per the petitioners, is being

denied to the LGBT persons because ofSection 377IPC as it makes

them apprehensive to speak openly about their sexual orientation and

makes them vulnerable to extortion, blackmail and denial of State

machinery for either protection or for enjoyment of other rights and

amenities and on certain occasions, the other concomitant rights are

affected.

15(2013)   2 SCC 398
16(2013)   10 SCC 59129

32.   The petitioners have advanced their argument thatSection 377IPC impedes the ability of the LGBTs to realize the constitutionally

guaranteed right to shelter. To illustrate the same, the petitioners

have drawn the attention of the Court to the fact that LGBTs seek

assistance of private resources such as Gay Housing Assistance

Resources (GHAR) in order to access safe and suitable shelter and

this is an indication that the members of this community are in need

of immediate care and protection of the State.

33. The decision inSuresh Koushal(supra), as per the petitioners,

is per incuriam as the view observed therein has failed to take into

account the amendment toSection 375IPC which has rendered

sexual ‗carnal intercourse against the order of nature‘ between man

and woman as permissible. Section 377, on the other hand, has

continued to render same sex carnal intercourse as an offence, even

if it is consensual. Further, the petitioners have assailed the decision

of this Court in Suresh Koushal’s case on the ground that the view

inthe said decisionon classification is contrary to the ‗impact or effect

test‘, for the result, in ultimate eventuality, leads to discrimination.Thus, the petitioners have contended that afterPuttaswamy(supra),

the view inSuresh Koushal(supra) needs to be overruled and the30proper test would be whetherSection 377IPC can be enacted by the

Parliament today after the decisions of this Court in NALSA (supra)

andPuttaswamy(supra) and other authorities laying immense

emphasis on individual choice.

34.   It is further contended that LGBT persons are deprived of their

rights due to the presence of Section 377 as they fear prosecution

and persecution upon revealing their sexual identities and, therefore,

this class of persons never approached this Court as petitioners,

rather they have always relied upon their teachers, parents, mental

health professionals and other organizations such as NGOs to speak

on their behalf. It is urged that the appellants inSuresh Koushal(supra) led this Court to assume that LGBT persons constitute only a

minuscule fraction whereas most of the studies indicate that they

constitute at least 7-8% of the population and that apart, rights are

not determined on the basis of percentage of populace but on a real

scrutiny of the existence of right and denial of the same. It is the

stand of the petitioners that majority perception or view cannot be the

guiding factor for sustaining the constitutionality of a provision or to

declare a provision as unconstitutional.

D.     Submissions on behalf of the respondents and other
       intervenors

35.    The respondent, Union of India, has, vide affidavit dated 11th

July, 2018, submitted that the matter at hand was referred to a

Constitution Bench to decide as to whether the lawlaid down inSuresh Koushal(supra) is correct or not and the only question

referred to this Bench is the question of the constitutional validity of

criminalizing 'consensual acts of adults in private' falling underSection 377IPC.

36.    Further, the Union has submitted that so far as the

constitutional validity ofSection 377IPC, to the extent it applies to

'consensual acts of adults in private', is concerned, the respondent

leaves the same to the wisdom of this Court.

37.    The respondent has also contended that in the eventSection

377IPC so far as 'consensual acts of adults in private' is declared

unconstitutional, other ancillary issues or rights which have not been

referred to this Bench for adjudication may not be dealt with by this

Bench asin that case, the Union of India expresses the wish to file

detailed affidavit in reply, for consideration of other issues and rights

would have far reaching and wide ramifications under various other

laws    and   will   also   have   consequences    which   are   neither32contemplated in the reference nor required to be answered by this

Hon‘ble Bench.

38.   The respondent has submitted that allowing any other issue

(other than the constitutional validity ofSection 377IPC) to be argued

and adjudicating the same without giving an opportunity to the Union

of India to file a counter affidavit may not be in the interest of justice

and would be violative of the principles of natural justice.

39.   Another set of written submissions has been filed by Shri K.

Radhakrishnan, senior counsel, on behalf of intervenor-NGO, Trust

God Ministries. The said intervenor has submitted that the

observations of this Court inPuttaswamy(supra), particularly in Para

146, virtually pre-empt and forestall the aforesaid NGO from raising

substantial contentions to the effect that there is no uncanalised and

unbridled right to privacy and the said right cannot be abused. Further,

the intervenor has contended that there is no personal liberty to

abuse one‘s organs and that the offensive acts proscribed bySection

377IPC are committed by abusing the organs. Such acts, as per the

intervenor, are undignified and derogatory to the constitutional

concept of dignity and if any infraction is caused to the concept of33dignity,   then   it   would   amount   to   constitutional   wrong   and

constitutional immorality.

40.   It is also the case of the intervenor that issues pertaining to the

constitutional and other legal rights of the transgender community,

their gender identity and sexual orientation have been exhaustively

considered in the light of the various provisions of the Constitution

and, accordingly, reliefs have been granted by this Court in NALSA

(supra). It is contended by the intervenor that no further reliefs can be

granted to them and the prayers made by them is only to abuse

privacy and personal liberty by transgressing the concepts of dignity

and public morality.

41.   As per the intervenor, Section 377 rightly makes the acts stated

therein punishable as Section 377 has been incorporated after taking

note of the legal systems and principles which prevailed in ancient

India and now in 2018, the said Section is more relevant legally,

medically, morally and constitutionally.

42.   To illustrate this, the intervenor has drawn the attention of this

Court to W. Friedmann from 'Law in a Changing Society' wherein he

has observed that to prohibit a type of conduct which a particular

society considers worthy of condemnation by criminal sanctions is34deeply influenced by the values governing that society and it,

therefore, varies from one country to another and one period of

history to another.

43.   Further, it has been contended by the intervenor that persons

indulging in unnatural sexual acts which have been made punishable

underSection 377IPC are more susceptible and vulnerable to

contracting HIV/AIDS and the percentage of prevalence of AIDS in

homosexuals is much greater than heterosexuals and that the right to

privacy may not be extended in order to enable people to indulge in

unnatural offences and thereby contact AIDS.

44.   It is also the case of the intervenor that if Section 377 is

declared unconstitutional, then the family system which is the bulwark

of social culture will be in shambles, the institution of marriage will be

detrimentally affected and rampant homosexual activities for money

would tempt and corrupt young Indians into this trade.

45.   Written submissions have also been filed on behalf of Mr.

Suresh Kumar Koushal, intervenor, submitting therein that the

argument of the petitioners that consensual acts of adults in private

have been decriminalized in many parts of the world and, therefore, it

deserves to be decriminalized in India as well does not hold good for35several reasons inasmuch as the political, economic and cultural

heritage of those countries are very different from India which is a

multicultural and multi-linguistic country.

46.        The intervenor has contended that since fundamental rights are

not absolute, there is no unreasonableness inSection 377IPC and

decriminalizing the same would run foul to all religions practised in

the country, and, while deciding the ambit and scope of constitutional

morality,Article 25also deserves to be given due consideration.

47.        Another application for intervention, being I.A No. 91250 of

2018, was filed and the same was allowed. It has been contended by

the said intervenor that in the attempt that Section 377 is struck down,

it would render the victims complaining of forced acts covered under

the existingSection 377IPC remediless as the said Section not only

impinges on carnal intercourse against the order of nature between

two consenting adults but also applies to forced penile non- vaginal

sexual intercourse between adults. This, as per the intervenor, would

be contrary to the decision of this Court inIqbal Singh Marwah and

another v. Meenakshi Marwahand another17.

17   (2005) 4 SCC 37036

48.   The applicant has also submitted that in the event consenting

acts between two same sex adults are excluded from the ambit ofSection 377IPC, then a married woman would be rendered

remediless under theIPCagainst her bi-sexual husband and his

consenting male partner indulging in any sexual acts.

49.   The intervenor has suggested that the alleged misuse ofSection 377IPC as highlighted by the petitioners can be curbed by

adding an explanation toSection 377IPC defining 'aggrieved person'

which shall include only non-consenting partner or aggrieved person

or wife or husband or any person on their behalf on the lines ofSection 198(1)of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. This, as per

the applicant, would curb any mala fide complaint lodged by

authorities and vindictive or mischievous persons when the act

complained of is 'consenting act' between two persons. Further, the

applicant has submitted that this Court may be pleased to identify that

the courts shall take cognizance of an offence underSection 377IPC

only on a complaint made by an aggrieved person. Such an approach,

as per the applicant, inherently respects consent and also protects

from interference and safeguards the privacy and dignity of an

individual underArticle 21of the Constitution.37

50.        The applicant has also contended that the constitutionality of

any legislation is always to be presumed and if there is any

vagueness in the definition of any section, the courts have to give

such a definition which advances the purpose of the legislation and

that the courts must make every effort to uphold the constitutional

validity of a statute if that requires giving a stretched construction in

view of the decisions of this Court inK.A. Abbas v. Union of Indiaand another18 and Rt. Rev. Msgr.Mark Netto v. State of Keralaand others19.

51.        The applicant, through his learned counsel Mr. Harvinder

Chowdhury, submits that if the right to privacy as recognized inPuttaswamy(supra) is allowed its full scope and swing, then that

itself would rule out prosecution in all cases of consensual

unnatural sex between all couples, whether heterosexual or

homosexual, and without having to engage in reading down, much

less striking down of, the provisions ofSection 377IPC in its

present form. This is so because the State cannot compel

individuals engaging in consensual sexual acts from testifying


18   (1970) 2 SCC 780
19   (1979) 1 SCC 2338against one another as it involves a breach of privacy unless the

consent itself is under challenge and one cannot be a consenting

victim of a crime so long as the consent is legally valid.

52.   Submissions have also been advanced on behalf of Raza

Academy, intervenor, through its learned counsel Mr. R.R Kishore,

who has contended that homosexuality is against the order of

nature and Section 377 rightly forbids it. Prohibition against carnal

intercourse involving penetration into non-sexual parts of the body

does not constitute discrimination as laws based on biological

reality can never be unconstitutional, for if a male is treated as a

male, a female as a female and a transgender as a transgender, it

does not amount to discrimination.

53.   The applicant has submitted that the purpose of criminal law is

to protect the citizens from something that is injurious and since

carnal intercourse between two persons is offensive and injurious, it

is well within the State's jurisdiction to put reasonable restrictions to

forbid such aberrant human behaviour by means of legislation, for it

is the duty of the State that people with abnormal conduct are

prohibited from imperiling the life, health and security of the39community. Unrestrained pleasure, and that too of a lascivious

nature, is not conducive for the growth of a civilized society, such

inordinate gratification needs to be curbed and, thus, prohibition

against carnal intercourse as defined inSection 377IPC does not

violate the constitutional rights of a person.

54.        Another application for intervention, being I.A No. 9341 of

2011, was filed and allowed. The applicant, in his written

submissions, after delineating the concept of immorality, has

submitted that the doctrine of manifest arbitrariness is of no

application to the present case as the law is not manifestly or

otherwise arbitrary, for Section 377 criminalizes an act irrespective of

gender or sexual orientation of the persons involved. The universal

application of the said provision without any gender bias is the

touchstone of Part III of the Constitution and is not arbitrary as there

is no intentional or unreasonable discrimination in the provision.

55.        The applicant has drawn the attention of this Court to the case

ofFazal Rab Choudhary v. State of Bihar20wherein this Court

held that the offence underSection 377IPC implies sexual



20(1982)   3 SCC 940perversity.Further, it is the case of the applicant that there should

not be identical transplantation of Western ideology in our country

which has also been a matter of concern for this Court inJagmohan Singh v. State of U.P.21

56.     The applicant, after citing the case ofState of Gujarat v.

Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamatand others22, has stressed

upon the fact that the interest of a citizen or a section of the society,

howsoever important, is secondary to the interest of the country or

community as a whole and while judging the reasonability of

restrictions imposed on fundamental rights, due consideration must

also be given to the Directive Principles stated in Part IV. In view of

these aforesaid submissions, the applicant has submitted that

fundamental rights may not be overstretched and the Directive

Principles of State Policy which are fundamental in the governance

of the country cannot be neglected, for they are not less significant

than what is fundamental in the life of an individual as held in

Kesavananda Bharati v. Union of India23.

21 (1973) 1 SCC 20
22 (2005) 8 SCC 534
23 (1973) 4 SCC 22541

57.   Another application for intervention, being I.A. No. 76790 of

2018, has been filed by Apostolic Alliance of Churches and the Utkal

Christian Council. The applicants have submitted that the Court,

while interpretingSection 377IPC, has to keep in mind that there can

be situations where consent is obtained by putting a person in fear of

death or hurt or consent can also be obtained under some

misconception or due to unsoundness of mind, intoxication or

inability to understand the nature and the consequences of the acts

prohibited bySection 377IPC.

58.   The applicant has also advanced the argument thatSection

377IPC in its present form does not violateArticle 14of the

Constitution as it merely defines a particular offence and its

punishment and it is well within the power of the State to determine

who should be regarded as a class for the purpose of a legislation

and this, as per the applicant, is reasonable classification in the

context ofSection 377IPC.

59.   Further, the applicant has contended thatSection 377IPC is

not violative ofArticle 15of the Constitution as the said Article

prohibits discrimination on the grounds of only religion, race, caste,42sex, place of birth or any of them but not sexual orientation. The word

‗sexual orientation‘, as per the applicant, is alien to our Constitution

and the same cannot be imported within it for testing the

constitutional validity of a provision or legislation. As per the applicant,

if the word 'sex' has to be replaced by 'sexual orientation', it would

require a constitutional amendment.

60.     It is also the case of the applicant that the Yogyakarta

principles which have been heavily relied upon by the petitioners to

bolster their stand have limited sanctity inasmuch as they do not

amount to an international treaty binding on the State parties and

there     are   no   inter-governmentally      negotiated     international

instruments or agreed human rights treaties on the issue of LGBTs.

61.     Further, the applicant has submitted that there is no

requirement to reconsider the decision of this Court inSuresh

Koushal(supra) wherein it was held that there is a presumption of

constitutionality of a legislation and the Court must adopt self-

restraint and thereby refrain from giving birth to judicial legislation. In

the applicant's view, the legislative wisdom of the Parliament must be43respected and it must be left to the Parliament to amendSection 377IPC, if so desired.

62.        The applicant has contended that if the prayers of the

petitioners herein are allowed, it would amount to judicial legislation,

for the Courts cannot add or delete words into a statute. It is stated

that the words 'consent' and/or 'without consent' are not mentioned inSection 377IPC and, therefore, the Courts cannot make such an

artificial distinction. To buttress this stand, the applicant has relied

upon the decision of this Court inSakshi v. Union of India and

others24 wherein it was observed that the attention of the Court

should be on what has been said and also on what has not been said

while interpreting the statute and that it would be wrong and

dangerous for the Court to proceed by substituting some other words

in a statute since it is well settled that a statute enacting an offence

or imposing a penalty has to be strictly construed.

63.        The applicant has also drawn the attention of this Court to the

decision inUnion of India and another v. Deoki Nandan

Aggarwal25wherein it was observed that the Court cannot rewrite,


24(2004)  5 SCC 518
251992   Supp. (1) SCC 32344recast or re-frame the legislation for the good reason that it has no

power to legislate since the power to legislate has not been conferred

upon the Court and, therefore, the Courts cannot add words to a

statute or read words into it which are not there.The Courts are to

decide what the law is and not what it should be.

64.   It is also the case of the applicant that the decriminalization ofSection 377IPC will open a floodgate of social issues which the

legislative domain is not capable of accommodating as same sex

marriages would become social experiments with unpredictable

outcome.

65.   Further,   it   is   the   contention   of   the   applicant   that

decriminalization ofSection 377IPC will have cascading effect on

existing laws such asSection 32(d)of the Parsi Marriage and

Divorce Act, 1936;Section 27(7)(1A)A of the Special Marriage Act,

1954 which permits a wife to present a petition for divorce to the

district court on the ground,—(i) that her husband has, since the

solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or

bestiality;Section 10(2)of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 andSection

13(2)of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

E.    Decisions in Naz Foundation and Suresh Koushal

66.   We shall now advert to what had been stated by the Delhi High

Court in Naz Foundation and thereafter advert to the legal base of

the decision in Suresh Koushal’s case. The Delhi High Court had

taken the view thatArticle 15of the Constitution prohibits

discrimination on several enumerated grounds including sex. The

High Court preferred an expansive interpretation of 'sex' so as to

include prohibition of discrimination on the ground of 'sexual

orientation' and that sex-discrimination cannot be read as applying to

gender simpliciter. Discrimination, as per the High Court's view, on

the basis of sexual orientation is grounded in stereotypical judgments

and generalization about the conduct of either sex.

67.   Another facet of the Indian Constitution that the High Court

delineated was that of inclusiveness as the Indian Constitution

reflects this value of inclusiveness deeply ingrained in the Indian

society and nurtured over several generations. The High Court

categorically said that those who are perceived by the majority as

deviants or different are not to be, on that score, excluded or

ostracised. In the High Court's view, where a society displays46inclusiveness and understanding, the LGBT persons can be assured

of a life of dignity and non-discrimination.

68.   It has been further opined by the High Court that the

Constitution does not permit any statutory criminal law to be held

captive of the popular misconceptions of who the LGBTs are, as it

cannot be forgotten that discrimination is the antithesis of equality

and recognition of equality in its truest sense will foster the dignity of

every individual. That apart, the High Court had taken the view that

social morality has to succumb to the concept of constitutional

morality.

69.   On the basis of the aforesaid reasons, the High Court declaredSection 377IPC violative ofArticles 14, 15and21of the Constitution

in so far as it criminalises consensual sexual acts of adults in private,

whereas for non-consensual penile non-vaginal sex and penile non-

vaginal sex involving minors, the High Court ruled thatSection 377IPC was valid.

70.   The Delhi High Court judgment was challenged inSuresh

Koushal(supra) wherein this Court opined that acts which fall within

the ambit ofSection 377IPC can only be determined with reference

to the act itself and to the circumstances in which it is executed.47While so opining, the Court held thatSection 377IPC would apply

irrespective of age and consent, forSection 377IPC does not

criminalize a particular people or identity or orientation and only

identifies certain acts which, when committed, would constitute an

offence.Such a prohibition, in the Court's view inSuresh Koushal(supra), regulates sexual conduct regardless of gender identity and

orientation.

71.   The Court further observed that those who indulge in carnal

intercourse in the ordinary course and those who indulge in carnal

intercourse against the order of nature constitute different classes

and the people falling in the latter category cannot claim thatSection

377IPC suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and irrational

classification. The Court further observed that while reading downSection 377of the Indian Penal Code, it cannot be overlooked that

only a minuscule fraction of the country's population constitutes

lesbians, gays, bisexuals or transgenders and in last more than 150

years, less than 200 persons have been prosecuted underSection

377of the Indian Penal Code which cannot, therefore, be made a

sound basis for declaringSection 377IPC ultra vires the provisions ofArticles 14, 15and21of the Constitution.

72.        The submission advanced by the respondents therein to the

effect that the provision had become a pernicious tool for perpetrating

harassment, blackmail and torture on those belonging to the LGBT

community was repelled by stating that such treatment is neither

mandated by the Section nor condoned by it and the mere fact that

the Section is misused by police authorities and others is not a

reflection of the vires of the Section, though it might be a relevant

factor for the Legislature to consider while judging the desirability of

amendingSection 377of the Indian Penal Code.

F.         Other judicial pronouncements on Section 377 IPC

73.        Presently, we may refer to some of the judgments and the

views taken therein by this Court as well as by the High Courts onSection 377IPC so as to have a holistic perspective.

74.        While interpreting the said provision, the Courts have held that

the provision stipulates certain acts, which when committed, would

constitute a criminal offence.InChildline India Foundation and

another v. Allan John Watersand others26, the Court was dealing

with carnal intercourse against the order of nature when the material

on record showed that the accused Nos. 2 and 3 used to have sex


26   (2011) 6 SCC 26149and fellatio with PWs 1 and 4. The Court opined that the ingredients

ofSection 377IPC were proved and, accordingly, restored the

conviction and sentence of 6 years‘ rigorous imprisonment and

confirmed the imposition of fine.InFazal Rab Choudhary(supra),

although the Court convicted the accused underSection 377IPC, yet

it took note of the absence of any force in the commission of the act.

The Court also took into account the prevalent notions of permissive

society and the fact that homosexuality has been legalized in some

countries. In view of the same, the Court reduced the sentence of 3

years imposed on the accused to 6 months opining that the aforesaid

aspects must also be kept in view as they have a bearing on the

question of offence and quantum of sentence.

75.       A reference may be made to Khanu v. Emperor27 which was

also alluded to in Suresh Koushal‘s case. We deem it appropriate to

reproduce a part of Khanu‘s decision to understand how the courts in

India had understood the word ―carnal intercourse against the order

of nature‖. The said passage reads thus:-

Section 377 punishes certain persons who have
carnal intercourse against the order of nature with inter
alia human beings. Is the act here committed one of
carnal intercourse? If so, it is clearly against the order
of nature, because the natural object of carnal
intercourse is that there should be the possibility of
conception of human beings which in the case of
coitus per os is impossible. Intercourse may be defined
as mutual frequent action by members of independent
organisation. Commercial intercourse [is thereafter
referred to; emphasis is made on the reciprocity].

   By a metaphor the word intercourse like the word
commerce is applied to the relations of the sexes. Here
also there is the temporary visitation of one organism
by a member of other organisation, for certain clearly
defined and limited objects. The primary object of the
visiting organisation is to obtain euphoria by means of
a detent of the nerves consequent on the sexual crisis.
But there is no intercourse unless the visiting member
is enveloped at least partially by the visited organism,
for intercourse connotes reciprocity. Looking at the
question in this way it would seem that sin of
Gomorrah is no less carnal intercourse than the sin of
sodomy. …

   It is to be remembered that the Penal Code does
not, except in Section 377, render abnormal sexual
vice punishable at all. In England indecent assaults are
punishable very severely. It is possible that under the
Penal Code, some cases might be met by prosecuting
the offender for simple assault, but that is a
compoundable offence and in any case the patient
could in no way be punished. It is to be supposed that
the legislature intended that a Tigellinus should carry51on his nefarious profession perhaps vitiating and
           depraving hundreds of children with perfect immunity?

             I doubt not, therefore, that coitus per os is
           punishable under Section 377 of the Penal Code.‖

76.In Suresh Koushal‘s case, there has also been a reference to

the decision of the Gujarat High Court inLohana Vasantlal

Devchand v. State28 wherein the issue presented before the High

Court was whether an offence under Section 377 read withSection

511IPC had been committed on account of the convict putting his

male organ in the mouth of the victim, if the act was done voluntarily

by him. A contention was raised that there was no penetration and,

therefore, there could not have been any carnal intercourse. The

High Court referred to a passage from the book ‗Pyschology of Sex‘29authored by Mr. Havelock Ellis which reads thus:-

The High Court of Kerala held thus:-

In this connection, it may be noted that the act in
           Section 376 is ‗sexual intercourse‘ and the act in
           Section 377 is ‗carnal intercourse against the order of
           nature‘.

22. The position in English law on this question has
           been brought to my notice. The old decision of R. v.
           Samuel Jacobs 31 lays down that penetration through
           the mouth does not amount to the offence of sodomy
           under English law. The counsel therefore argues that
           sexual intercourse between the thighs cannot also be
           an offence under Section 377 of the Penal Code. In
           Sirkar v. Gula Mythien Pillai Chaithu Maho Mathu32 a
           Full Bench of the Travancore High Court held that
           having connection with a person in the mouth was an
           offence under Section 377 of the Penal Code. In a
           short judgment, the learned Judges held that it was
           unnecessary to refer to English Statute Law and
           English text books which proceeded upon an
           interpretation of the words sodomy, buggery and
           bestiality; and that the words used in the Penal Code
           were very simple and wide enough to include all acts
           against the order of nature. My view on the question is
           also that the words of Section 377 are simple and wide
           enough to include any carnal intercourse against the
           order of nature within its ambit. Committing intercourse


31   1817 Russ & Ry 331 : 168 ER 830 (CCR)
32   (1908) 14 TLR Appendix 43 (Ker)55between the thighs of another is carnal intercourse
          against the order of nature.‖

79.InCalvin Francis v. State of Orissa33, the Orissa High Court

had reproduced certain passages from Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol.

81, pp. 368-70. We may reproduce the same:-

80.       Referring tothe said decision, the two-Judge Bench in Suresh

Koushal‘s case has opined:-

81.   From the aforesaid analysis, it is perceptible that the two-Judge

Bench has drawn a distinction between the ―class‖ and the ―act‖ that

has been treated as an offence. On a plain reading of the provision,

it is noticeable that the ―act‖ covers all categories of persons if the

offence is committed. Thus, the seminal issue that emerges for

consideration, as has been understood by various High Courts and

this Court, is whether the act can be treated as a criminal offence if it

violatesArticles 19(1)(a)and21of the Constitution. Therefore, the

provision has to be tested on the anvil of the said constitutional

provisions. Additionally, it is also to be tested on the touchstone ofArticle 14especially under the scanner of its second limb, that is,

manifest arbitrariness.   For adjudging the aforesaid facets, certain

fundamental concepts which are intrinsically and integrally associated

with the expression of a person who enjoys certain inalienable natural

rights which also have been recognized under the Constitution are

required to be addressed. In this context, the individuality of a person57and the acceptance of identity invite advertence to some necessary

concepts which eventually recognize the constitutional status of an

individual that resultantly brushes aside the ―act‖ and respects the

dignity and choice of the individual.

G.         The Constitution – an organic charter of progressive rights

82.        A democratic Constitution like ours is an organic and breathing

document with senses which are very much alive to its surroundings,

for it has been created in such a manner that it can adapt to the

needs and developments taking place in the society. It was

highlighted by this Court in the case ofChief Justice of Andhra

Pradesh and others v. L.V.A. Dixitulu and others34 that the

Constitution is a living, integrated organism having a soul and

consciousness of its own and its pulse beats, emanating from the

spinal cord of its basic framework, can be felt all over its body, even

in the extremities of its limbs.

83.In the case ofSaurabh Chaudri and others v. Union of Indiaand others35, it was observed:-

84.        Thus, we are required to keep in view the dynamic concepts

inherent in the Constitution that have the potential to enable and urge

the constitutional courts to beam with expansionism that really grows

to adapt to the ever-changing circumstances without losing the

identity of the Constitution.       The idea of identity of the individual

and the constitutional legitimacy behind the same is of immense

significance. Therefore, in this context, the duty of the constitutional

courts gets accentuated. We emphasize on the role of the

constitutional courts in realizing the evolving nature of this living

instrument. Through its dynamic and purposive interpretative

approach, the judiciary must strive to breathe life into the Constitution

and not render the document a collection of mere dead letters. The

following observations made in the case ofAshok Kumar Gupta and

another v. State of U.P.and others36 further throws light on this role

of the courts:-

36   (1997) 5 SCC 20159

85.        The rights that are guaranteed as Fundamental Rights under

our Constitution are the dynamic and timeless rights of 'liberty' and

'equality' and it would be against the principles of our Constitution to

give         them      a   static   interpretation   without   recognizing   their

transformative and evolving nature. The argument does not lie in the

fact that the concepts underlying these rights change with the

changing times but the changing times illustrate and illuminate the

concepts underlying the said rights.In this regard, the observations inVideo Electronics Pvt. Ltd. and another v. State of Punjaband

another37 are quite instructive:-

86.        Our Constitution fosters and strengthens the spirit of equality

and envisions a society where every person enjoys equal rights which

enable him/her to grow and realize his/her potential as an individual.

This guarantee of recognition of individuality runs through the entire


37   (1990) 3 SCC 8760length and breadth of this dynamic instrument. The Constitution has

been conceived of and designed in a manner which acknowledges

the fact that 'change is inevitable'. It is the duty of the courts to realize

the constitutional vision of equal rights in consonance with the current

demands and situations and not to read and interpret the same as

per the standards of equality that existed decades ago. The judiciary

cannot remain oblivious to the fact that the society is constantly

evolving and many a variation may emerge with the changing times.

There is a constant need to transform the constitutional idealism into

reality by fostering respect for human rights, promoting inclusion of

pluralism, bringing harmony, that is, unity amongst diversity,

abandoning the idea of alienation or some unacceptable social

notions built on medieval egos and establishing the cult of egalitarian

liberalism founded on reasonable principles that can withstand

scrutiny.

87.InAshok Kumar Gupta(supra), the Court had observed that

common sense has always served in the court's ceaseless striving as

a voice of reason to maintain the blend of change and continuity of

order which are sine qua non for stability in the process of change in

a parliamentary democracy. The Court ruled that it is not bound to61accept an interpretation which retards the progress or impedes social

integration. The Court further observed that it is required to adopt

such interpretation which would give the ideals set out in the

Preamble to the Constitution aided by Part III and Part IV a

meaningful and living reality for all sections of the society.

88.   It is through this armoury of expansive dynamism that the

courts have been able to give an all-inclusive interpretation to the

fundamental rights enshrined in Part III of our Constitution. This is

borne testimony by the decisions of the constitutional courts which

have evolved views for extending the protection of fundamental rights

to those who have been deprived of the enjoyment of the same. If not

for such an approach adopted by the courts, our Constitution and its

progressive principles would have been rendered ineffective and the

dynamic charter would be reduced to a mere ornate document

without any purpose or object.

89.   The Court, as the final arbiter of the Constitution, has to keep in

view the necessities of the needy and the weaker sections. The role

of the Court assumes further importance when the class or

community whose rights are in question are those who have been the

object of humiliation, discrimination, separation and violence by not62only the State and the society at large but also at the hands of their

very own family members. The development of law cannot be a mute

spectator to the struggle for the realisation and attainment of the

rights of such members of the society.

90.   The authority in NALSA is one such recent illustration where

the rights of transgenders as a third sex was recognized which had

been long due in a democracy like ours. This Court ruled: -

The   ‗living   document‘   concept    finds   place   in    several

international authorities as well. The courts in other jurisdictions have63endorsed the view that the Constitution is forever evolving in nature

and that a progressive approach is mandated by the principles

inherent in the Constitution itself.

91.        The Supreme Court of Canada, while giving an expansive

interpretation to marriage by including same-sex unions within its

encompass, in Re: Same Sex Marriage38, has observed:-

92.        As early as the 1920s, the Supreme Court of the United States

in the case ofState of Missouri v. Holland39 , while making a

comparison between the ‗instrument in dispute' and the 'Constitution',

had made the following observations with regard to the nature of the

Constitution:-

93.    In one of his celebrated works, Judge Richard Posner made

certain observations which would be relevant to be reproduced here:-

94.    Thus, it is demonstrable that expansive growth of constitutional

idealism is embedded in the theory of progress, abandonment of

status quoist attitude, expansion of the concept of inclusiveness and

constant remembrance of the principle of fitting into the norm of

change with a constitutional philosophy.

40Posner, Richard: (1992) Sex and Reason, Harvard University Press, pg. 328. ISBN 0-674-
 80280-265H.        Transformative constitutionalism and the rights of LGBT
          community

95.       For understanding the need of having a constitutional

democracy and for solving the million dollar question as to why we

adopted the Constitution, we perhaps need to understand the

concept of transformative constitutionalism with some degree of

definiteness. In this quest of ours, the ideals enshrined in the

Preamble to our Constitution would be a guiding laser beam. The

ultimate goal of our magnificent Constitution is to make right the

upheaval which existed in the Indian society before the adopting of

the Constitution. The Court inState of Kerala and another v. N.M.

Thomas and others41 observed that the Indian Constitution is a

great social document, almost revolutionary in its aim of transforming

a medieval, hierarchical society into a modern, egalitarian democracy

and its provisions can be comprehended only by a spacious, social-

science approach, not by pedantic, traditional legalism. The whole

idea of having a Constitution is to guide the nation towards a

resplendent future. Therefore, the purpose of having a Constitution is

to transform the society for the better and this objective is the

fundamental pillar of transformative constitutionalism.

41   AIR 1976 SC 49066

96.   The concept of transformative constitutionalism has at its kernel

a pledge, promise and thirst to transform the Indian society so as to

embrace therein, in letter and spirit, the ideals of justice, liberty,

equality and fraternity as set out in the Preamble to our Constitution.

The expression ‗transformative constitutionalism‘ can be best

understood by embracing a pragmatic lens which will help in

recognizing the realities of the current day. Transformation as a

singular term is diametrically opposed to something which is static

and stagnant, rather it signifies change, alteration and the ability to

metamorphose. Thus, the concept of transformative constitutionalism,

which is an actuality with regard to all Constitutions and particularly

so with regard to the Indian Constitution, is, as a matter of fact, the

ability of the Constitution to adapt and transform with the changing

needs of the times.

97.   It is this ability of a Constitution to transform which gives it the

character of a living and organic document. A Constitution

continuously shapes the lives of citizens in particular and societies in

general. Its exposition and energetic appreciation by constitutional

courts constitute the lifeblood of progressive societies. The

Constitution would become a stale and dead testament without67dynamic,          vibrant       and    pragmatic    interpretation.   Constitutional

provisions have to be construed and developed in such a manner that

their real intent and existence percolates to all segments of the

society. That is the raison d'etre for the Constitution.

98.       The Supreme Court as well as other constitutional courts have

time and again realized that in a society undergoing fast social and

economic change, static judicial interpretation of the Constitution

would stultify the spirit of the Constitution. Accordingly, the

constitutional             courts,    while   viewing   the   Constitution   as   a

transformative document, have ardently fulfilled their obligation to act

as the sentinel on qui vive for guarding the rights of all individuals

irrespective of their sex, choice and sexual orientation.

99. The purpose of transformative constitutionalism has been aptly

described in the case of Road Accident Fund and another v.

Mdeyide42 wherein the Constitutional Court of South Africa, speaking

in the context of the transformative role of the Constitution of South

Africa, had observed:-

100. In Bato Star Fishing (Pty) Ltd v. Minister of Environmental

Affairs and Tourism and others43, the Constitutional Court of South

Africa opined:-

101.          Davies44 understands transformation as follows:-

102. A J Van der Walt                            has metaphorically, by comparing

'constitutional transformation' to 'dancing', described the art of

constitutional transformation to be continually progressive where one

does not stop from daring to imagine alternatives and that the society

could be different and a better place where the rights of every

individual are given due recognition:-

103. Again, the Supreme Court of South Africa in President of the

Republic of South Africa v. Hugo46 observed that the prohibition on

unfair discrimination in the interim Constitution seeks not only to

45 Van der Walt, Dancing with codes - Protecting, developing and deconstructing property rights in
   a constitutional state, 118 (2) J. S. APR. L. 258 (2001)46(1997) 6 B.C.L.R. 708 (CC)70avoid       discrimination           against        people        who       are      members        of

disadvantaged groups but also that at the heart of the prohibition of

unfair discrimination lies a recognition that the purpose of our new

constitutional and democratic order is the establishment of a society

in which all human beings will be accorded equal dignity and respect,

regardless of their membership of particular groups.

104. Equality does not only imply recognition of individual dignity but

also includes within its sphere ensuring of equal opportunity to

advance and develop their human potential and social, economic and

legal interests of every individual and the process of transformative

constitutionalism is dedicated to this purpose. It has been observed

by Albertyn & Goldblatt47:-

105. In Investigating Directorate: Serious Economic Offences

and others v. Hyundai Motor Distributors (Pty) Ltd and others: In47Albertyn & Goldblatt, Facing the challenge of transformation: Difficulties in the development of
 an indigenous jurisprudence of equality, 14 S. AFR. J. HUM. RTS. 248 (1998)71Re Hyundai Motor Distributors (Pty) Ltd and others v. Smit NO

and others48, the Constitutional Court of South Africa observed:-

106. The society has changed much now, not just from the year

1860 when theIndian Penal Codewas brought into force but there

has also been continuous progressive change. In many spheres, the

sexual minorities have been accepted. They have been given space

after the NALSA judgment but the offence punishable underSection

377IPC, as submitted, creates a chilling effect. The freedom that is

required to be attached to sexuality still remains in the pavilion with

482001   (1) SA 545 (CC)72no nerves to move. The immobility due to fear corrodes the desire to

express one‘s own sexual orientation as a consequence of which the

body with flesh and bones feels itself caged and a sense of fear

gradually converts itself into a skeleton sans spirit.

107. The question of freedom of choosing a partner is reflective from

a catena of recent judgments of this Court such asShafin Jahan(supra) wherein the Court held that a person who has come of age

and has the capability to think on his/her own has a right to choose

his/her life partner. It is apposite to reproduce some of the

observations made by the Court which are to the following effect:-

108. Recently, inShakti Vahini(supra), the Court has ruled that the

right to choose a life partner is a facet of individual liberty and the

Court, for the protection of this right, issued preventive, remedial and73punitive measures to curb the menace of honour killings. The Court

observed:-

109. An argument is sometimes advanced that what is permissible

between two adults engaged in acceptable sexual activity is different

in the case of two individuals of the same sex, be it homosexuals or

lesbians, and the ground of difference is        supported by social

standardization. Such an argument ignores the individual orientation,

which is naturally natural, and disrobes the individual of his/her

identity and the inherent dignity and choice attached to his/her being.

110. The principle of transformative constitutionalism also places

upon the judicial arm of the State a duty to ensure and uphold the

supremacy of the Constitution, while at the same time ensuring that a

sense of transformation is ushered constantly and endlessly in the

society by interpreting and enforcing the Constitution as well as other

provisions of law in consonance with the avowed object. The idea is

to steer the country and its institutions in a democratic egalitarian

direction where there is increased protection of fundamental rights74and    other freedoms.     It   is    in this   way that    transformative

constitutionalism attains the status of an ideal model imbibing the

philosophy and morals of constitutionalism and fostering greater

respect for human rights.        It ought to be remembered that the

Constitution is not a mere parchment; it derives its strength from the

ideals and values enshrined in it. However, it is only when we adhere

to constitutionalism as the supreme creed and faith and develop a

constitutional culture to protect the fundamental rights of an individual

that   we   can   preserve      and    strengthen   the    values   of   our

compassionate Constitution.

I.     Constitutional morality and Section 377 IPC

111. The concept of constitutional morality is not limited to the mere

observance of the core principles of constitutionalism as the

magnitude and sweep of constitutional morality is not confined to the

provisions and literal text which a Constitution contains, rather it

embraces within itself virtues of a wide magnitude such as that of

ushering a pluralistic and inclusive society, while at the same time

adhering to the other principles of constitutionalism. It is further the

result of embodying constitutional morality that the values of

constitutionalism trickle down and percolate through the apparatus of75the State for the betterment of each and every individual citizen of the

State.

112. In one of the Constituent Assembly Debates, Dr. Ambedkar,

explaining the concept of constitutional morality by quoting the Greek

historian, George Grote, said:-

113. Our Constitution was visualized with the aim of securing to the

citizens of our country inalienable rights which were essential for

fostering a spirit of growth and development and at the same time

ensuring that the three organs of the State working under the aegis of

the Constitution and deriving their authority from the supreme

document, that is, the Constitution, practise constitutional morality.

The Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary all have to stay alive

to the concept of constitutional morality.

49   Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 7 (4th November 1948)76

114. In the same speech50, Dr. Ambedkar had quoted George Grote

who had observed:-

115. The society as a whole or even a minuscule part of the society

may aspire and prefer different things for themselves. They are

perfectly competent to have such a freedom to be different, like

different things, so on and so forth, provided that their different tastes

and liking remain within their legal framework and neither violates any

statute nor results in the abridgement of fundamental rights of any

50   Ibid
51   Grote, A History of Greece. Routledge, London, 2000, p. 93.77other citizen. The Preambular goals of our Constitution which contain

the noble objectives of Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity can

only be achieved through the commitment and loyalty of the organs of

the State to the principle of constitutional morality.

116. It is the concept of constitutional morality which strives and

urges the organs of the State to maintain such a heterogeneous fibre

in the society, not just in the limited sense, but also in multifarious

ways. It is the responsibility of all the three organs of the State to curb

any propensity or proclivity of popular sentiment or majoritarianism.

Any attempt to push and shove a homogeneous, uniform, consistent

and a standardised philosophy throughout the society would violate

the principle of constitutional morality. Devotion and fidelity to

constitutional morality must not be equated with the popular

sentiment prevalent at a particular point of time.

117. Any asymmetrical attitude in the society, so long as it is within

the legal and constitutional framework, must at least be provided an

environment in which it could be sustained, if not fostered. It is only

when such an approach is adopted that the freedom of expression

including that of choice would be allowed to prosper and flourish and78if that is achieved, freedom and liberty, which is the quintessence of

constitutional morality, will be allowed to survive.

118.InGovernment of NCT of Delhi v. Union of Indiaand

others52, one of us (Dipak Misra, CJI) observed:-

119. The duty of the constitutional courts is to adjudge the validity of

law on well-established principles, namely, legislative competence or

violations of fundamental rights or of any other constitutional

provisions. At the same time, it is expected from the courts as the

final arbiter of the Constitution to uphold the cherished principles of

the Constitution and not to be remotely guided by majoritarian view or




522018   (8) SCALE 7279popular perception. The Court has to be guided by the conception of

constitutional morality and not by the societal morality.

120. We may hasten to add here that in the context of the issue at

hand, when a penal provision is challenged as being violative of the

fundamental rights of a section of the society, notwithstanding the fact

whether the said section of the society is a minority or a majority, the

magna cum laude and creditable principle of constitutional morality, in

a constitutional democracy like ours where the rule of law prevails,

must not be allowed to be trampled by obscure notions of social

morality which have no legal tenability. The concept of constitutional

morality would serve as an aid for the Court to arrive at a just

decision which would be in consonance with the constitutional rights

of the citizens, howsoever small that fragment of the populace may

be. The idea of number, in this context, is meaningless; like zero on

the left side of any number.

121. In this regard, we have to telescopically analyse social morality

vis-à-vis constitutional morality. It needs no special emphasis to state

that whenever the constitutional courts come across a situation of

transgression or dereliction in the sphere of fundamental rights, which

are also the basic human rights of a section, howsoever small part of80the society, then it is for the constitutional courts to ensure, with the

aid of judicial engagement and creativity, that constitutional morality

prevails over social morality.

122. In the garb of social morality, the members of the LGBT

community must not be outlawed or given a step-motherly treatment

of malefactor by the society. If this happens or if such a treatment to

the LGBT community is allowed to persist, then the constitutional

courts, which are under the obligation to protect the fundamental

rights, would be failing in the discharge of their duty. A failure to do so

would reduce the citizenry rights to a cipher.

123. We must not forget that the founding fathers adopted an

inclusive Constitution with provisions that not only allowed the State,

but also, at times, directed the State, to undertake affirmative action

to eradicate the systematic discrimination against the backward

sections of the society and the expulsion and censure of the

vulnerable communities by the so-called upper caste/sections of the

society that existed on a massive scale prior to coming into existence

of the Constituent Assembly. These were nothing but facets of the

majoritarian social morality which were sought to be rectified by

bringing into force the Constitution of India. Thus, the adoption of the81Constitution, was, in a way, an instrument or agency for achieving

constitutional morality and means to discourage the prevalent social

morality at that time. A country or a society which embraces

constitutional morality has at its core the well-founded idea of

inclusiveness.

124. While testing the constitutional validity of impugned provision

of law, if a constitutional court is of the view that the impugned

provision falls foul to the precept of constitutional morality, then the

said provision has to be declared as unconstitutional for the pure and

simple reason that the constitutional courts exist to uphold the

Constitution.

J.      Perspective of human dignity

125. While discussing about the role of human dignity in gay rights

adjudication and legislation, Michele Finck53 observes:-

126. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 became the

Magna Carta of people all over the world. The first Article of the

UDHR was uncompromising in its generality of application: All

human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. Justice

Kirby succinctly observed:-

127. The fundamental idea of dignity is regarded as an inseparable

facet of human personality. Dignity has been duly recognized as an

important aspect of the right to life underArticle 21of the Constitution.

In the international sphere, the right to live with dignity had been

identified as a human right way back in 1948 with the introduction of

the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The constitutional courts

54Human   Rights Gay Rights by Michael Kirby, Published in ‘Humane Rights’ in 2016 by Future Leaders83of our country have solemnly dealt with the task of assuring and

preserving the right to dignity of each and every individual whenever

the occasion arises, for without the right to live with dignity, all other

fundamental rights may not realise their complete meaning.

128. To understand a person‘s dignity, one has to appreciate how

the dignity of another is to be perceived. Alexis de Tocqueville tells

us55:-

129. Every individual has many possessions which assume the

position of his/her definitive characteristics. There may not be any

obsession with them but he/she may abhor to be denuded of them,

for they are sacred to him/her and so inseparably associated that

he/she may not conceive of any dissolution. He/she would like others

to respect the said attributes with a singular acceptable condition that

there        is     mutual        respect.        Mutual       respect   abandons   outside

interference and is averse to any kind of interdiction. It is based on

the precept that the individuality of an individual is recognized,

accepted and respected. Such respect for the conception of dignity

5556,   New York State Bar Journal (No 3. April, 1984), p.5084has become a fundamental right underArticle 21of the Constitution

and that ushers in the right of liberty of expression. Dignity and liberty

as a twin concept in a society that cares for both, apart from painting

a grand picture of humanity, also smoothens the atmosphere by

promoting    peaceful    co-existence     and    thereby    makes     the

administration of justice easy. In such a society, everyone becomes a

part of the social engineering process where rights as inviolable and

sacrosanct principles are adhered to; individual choice is not an

exception and each one gets his/her space. Though no tower is built,

yet the tower of individual rights with peaceful co-existence is visible.

130.InCommon Cause (A Regd. Society) (supra), one of us has

observed that human dignity is beyond definition and it may, at times,

defy description. To some, it may seem to be in the world of

abstraction and some may even perversely treat it as an attribute of

egotism or accentuated eccentricity. This feeling may come from the

roots of absolute cynicism, but what really matters is that life without

dignity is like a sound that is not heard. Dignity speaks, it has its

sound, it is natural and human. It is a combination of thought and

feeling.

131.InManeka Gandhi v. Union of Indiaand another56, Krishna

Iyer, J. observed that life is a terrestrial opportunity for unfolding

personality and when any aspect ofArticle 21is viewed in a truncated

manner, several other freedoms fade out automatically. It has to be

borne in mind that dignity of all is a sacrosanct human right and sans

dignity, human life loses its substantial meaning.

132. Dignity is that component of one‘s being without which

sustenance of his/her being to the fullest or completest is

inconceivable. In the theatre of life, without possession of the attribute

of identity with dignity, the entity may be allowed entry to the centre

stage but would be characterized as a spineless entity or, for that

matter, projected as a ruling king without the sceptre. The purpose of

saying so is that the identity of every individual attains the quality of

an ―individual being‖ only if he/she has the dignity.      Dignity while

expressive of choice is averse to creation of any dent. When

biological expression, be it an orientation or optional expression of

choice, is faced with impediment, albeit through any imposition of law,

the individual‘s natural and constitutional right is dented. Such a

situation urges the conscience of the final constitutional arbiter to


56   (1978) 1 SCC 24886demolish the obstruction and remove the impediment so as to allow

the full blossoming of the natural and constitutional rights of

individuals. This is the essence of dignity and we say, without any

inhibition, that it is our constitutional duty to allow the individual to

behave and conduct himself/herself as he/she desires and allow

him/her to express himself/herself, of course, with the consent of the

other. That is the right to choose without fear. It has to be ingrained

as a necessary pre-requisite that consent is the real fulcrum of any

sexual relationship.

133. In this context, we may travel a little abroad. In Law v. Canada

(Minister of Employment and Immigration)57 capturing the essence

of dignity, the Supreme Court of Canada has made the following

observations:-

134. It is not only the duty of the State and the Judiciary to protect

this basic right to dignity, but the collective at large also owes a

responsibility to respect one another's dignity, for showing respect for

the dignity of another is a constitutional duty. It is an expression of the

component of constitutional fraternity.

135. The concept of dignity gains importance in the present scenario,

for a challenge has been raised to a provision of law which

encroaches upon this essential right of a severely deprived section of

our society. An individual's choice to engage in certain acts within

their private sphere has been restricted by criminalising the same on

account of the age old social perception. To harness such an

essential decision, which defines the individualism of a person, by

tainting it with criminality would violate the individual's right to dignity

by reducing it to mere letters without any spirit.

136. The European Court of Justice inP v. S58 in the context of

rights of individuals who intend to or have undergone sex

reassignment has observed that where a person is dismissed on the

ground that he or she intends to undergo or has undergone gender

58   Judgment of 30 April 1996.P v S and Cornwall County Council Case C-13/94. paras. 21-22.88reassignment, he or she is treated unfavorably by comparison with

persons of the sex to which he or she was deemed to belong before

undergoing gender reassignment. To tolerate such discrimination

would tantamount, as regards such a person, to a failure to respect

the dignity and freedom to which he or she is entitled and which the

Court has a duty to safeguard.

137. In Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey59, the

United States Supreme Court had opined that such matters which

involve the most intimate and personal choices a person may make in

a lifetime, choices central to personal dignity and autonomy, are

central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.

138. From the aforesaid pronouncements, some in different spheres

but some also in the sphere of sexual orientation, the constitutional

courts have laid emphasis on individual inclination, expression of both

emotional and physical behaviour and freedom of choice, of course,

subject to the consent of the other. A biological engagement, in

contradistinction to going to a restaurant or going to a theatre to see a

film or a play, is founded on company wherein both the parties have

consented for the act. The inclination is an expression of choice that


59505   U.S. 833 (1992)89defines the personality to cumulatively build up the elevated paradigm

of dignity. Be it clarified that expression of choice, apart from being a

facet of dignity, is also an essential component of liberty. Liberty as a

concept has to be given its due place in the realm of dignity, for both

are connected with the life and living of a persona.

K.    Sexual orientation

139. After stating about the value of dignity, we would have

proceeded to deal with the cherished idea of privacy which has

recently received concrete clarity in Puttaswamy‘s case. Prior to that,

we are advised to devote some space to sexual orientation and the

instructive definition of LGBT by Michael Kirby, former Judge of the

High Court of Australia:-

140. Presently, we shall focus on the aspect of sexual orientation.

Every human being has certain basic biological characteristics and

acquires or develops some facets under certain circumstances.

The first can generally be termed as inherent orientation that is

natural to his/her being. The second can be described as a

demonstration of his/her choice which gradually becomes an

inseparable quality of his/her being, for the individual also leans on

a different expression because of the inclination to derive

satisfaction. The third one has the proclivity which he/she

maintains and does not express any other inclination. The first one

is homosexuality, the second, bisexuality and third, heterosexuality.

The third one is regarded as natural and the first one, by the same

standard, is treated to be unnatural. When the second category
60SexualOrientation & Gender Identity – A New Province of Law for India, J. Michael D. Kirby, Tagore
  Lectures, 201392exercises his/her choice of homosexuality and involves in such an

act, the same is also not accepted. In sum, the ‗act‘ is treated

either in accord with nature or against the order of nature in terms

of societal perception.

141. The Yogyakarta Principles define the expression "sexual

orientation‖ thus:-

142. In its study, the American Psychological Association has

attempted to define ―sexual orientation‖ in the following manner:-

143. From the aforesaid, it has to be appreciated that homosexuality

is something that is based on sense of identity. It is the reflection of a

61American Psychological Association, "Answers to Your Questions for a Better Understanding of
 Sexual Orientation & Homosexuality," 200893sense of emotion and expression of eagerness to establish intimacy.

It is just as much ingrained, inherent and innate as heterosexuality.

Sexual orientation, as a concept, fundamentally implies a pattern of

sexual attraction. It is as natural a phenomenon as other natural

biological phenomena. What the science of sexuality has led to is that

an individual has the tendency to feel sexually attracted towards the

same sex, for the decision is one that is controlled by neurological

and biological factors. That is why it is his/her natural orientation

which is innate and constitutes the core of his/her being and identity.

That apart, on occasions, due to a sense of mutuality of release of

passion, two adults may agree to express themselves in a different

sexual behaviour which may include both the genders. To this, one

can attribute a bisexual orientation which does not follow the rigidity

but allows room for flexibility.

144. The society cannot remain unmindful to the theory which

several researches, conducted both in the field of biological and

psychological science, have proven and reaffirmed time and again.

To compel a person having a certain sexual orientation to proselytize

to another is like asking a body part to perform a function it was never

designed to perform in the first place. It is pure science, a certain94manner in which the brain and genitals of an individual function and

react. Whether one's sexual orientation is determined by genetic,

hormonal, developmental, social and/or cultural influences (or a

combination thereof), most people experience little or no sense of

choice about their sexual orientation.62

145. The statement of the American Psychological Association on

homosexuality which was released in July 1994 reiterates this

position in the following observations:-

(Emphasis is ours)
62   UNHCR GUIDELINES ON INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION NO. 9: Claims to Refugee Status based on
     Sexual Orientation and/or Gender Identity within the context of Article 1A(2) of the 1951
     Convention and/or its 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees95

146. In the said context, the observations made by Leonard Sax to

the following effect are relevant and are reproduced below:-

147. The Supreme Court of Canada in the case of James Egan and

John Norris Nesbit v. Her Majesty The Queen in Right of Canada

and another 63 , while holding that sexual orientation is one of the

grounds for claiming the benefit underSection 15(1)as it is

analogous to the grounds already set out in the list inSection 15(1)and the said list not being finite and exhaustive can be extended to

LGBTs on account of the historical, social, political and economic

disadvantage suffered by LGBTs, has observed:-

148. It is worth noting that scientific study has, by way of keen

analysis, arrived at the conclusion as regards the individual‘s

63[1995]   2 SCR 51396inherent orientation. Apart from orientation, as stated earlier, there

can be situations which influence the emotional behaviour of an

individual to seek intimacy in the same gender that may bring two

persons together in a biological pattern. It has to be treated as

consensual activity and reflective of consensual choice.

L.   Privacy and its concomitant aspects

149. While testing the constitutional validity ofSection 377IPC, due

regard must be given to the elevated right to privacy as has been

recently proclaimed inPuttaswamy(supra).We shall not delve in

detail upon the concept of the right to privacy as the same has been

delineated at length inPuttaswamy(supra). In the case at hand, our

focus is limited to dealing with the right to privacy vis-à-visSection

377IPC and other facets such as right to choice as part of the

freedom of expression and sexual orientation. That apart, within the

compartment of privacy, individual autonomy has a significant space.

Autonomy is individualistic. It is expressive of self-determination and

such self-determination includes sexual orientation and declaration of

sexual identity. Such an orientation or choice that reflects an

individual‘s autonomy is innate to him/her. It is an inalienable part of97his/her identity. The said identity under the constitutional scheme

does not accept any interference as long as its expression is not

against decency or morality. And the morality that is conceived of

under the Constitution is constitutional morality. Under the autonomy

principle, the individual has sovereignty over his/her body. He/she

can surrender his/her autonomy wilfully to another individual and their

intimacy in privacy is a matter of their choice.       Such concept of

identity is not only sacred but is also in recognition of the

quintessential facet of humanity in a person‘s nature. The autonomy

establishes identity and the said identity, in the ultimate eventuate,

becomes a part of dignity in an individual. This dignity is special to the

man/woman who has a right to enjoy his/her life as per the

constitutional norms and should not be allowed to wither and perish

like a mushroom. It is a directional shift from conceptual macrocosm

to cognizable microcosm. When such culture grows, there is an

affirmative move towards a more inclusive and egalitarian society.

Non-acceptance of the same would tantamount to denial of human

rights to people and one cannot be oblivious of the saying of Nelson

Mandela ― ―to deny people their human rights is to challenge their

very humanity.‖98

150.Article 12of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, (1948)

makes a reference to privacy by stating:-

151. Similarly,Article 17of the International Covenant of Civil and

Political Rights, to which India is a party, talks about privacy thus:-

152. The European Convention on Human Rights also seeks to

protect the right to privacy by stating:-

153. In the case of Dudgeon v. United Kingdom 64 , privacy has

been defined as under:-

64

154.InR. Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Naduand others65, while

discussing the concept of right to privacy, it has been observed that

the right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty guaranteed

to the citizens of this country byArticle 21and it is a "right to be let

alone", for a citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his/her

own, his/her family, marriage, procreation, motherhood, child-bearing

and education, among other matters.

155. The above authorities capture the essence of the right to

privacy. There can be no doubt that an individual also has a right to a

union underArticle 21of the Constitution. When we say union, we do

not mean the union of marriage, though marriage is a union. As a

concept, union also means companionship in every sense of the word,

be it physical, mental, sexual or emotional. The LGBT community is

seeking realisation of its basic right to companionship, so long as

such a companionship is consensual, free from the vice of deceit,

force, coercion and does not result in violation of the fundamental

rights of others.

65

(1994) 6 SCC 632100

156. Justice Blackmun, in his vigorous dissent, in the case of

Bowers, Attorney General of Georgia v. Hardwick et al. 66 ,

regarding the ―right to be let alone‖, referred to Paris Adult Theatre I

v. Slaton67 wherein he observed that only the most willful blindness

could obscure the fact that sexual intimacy is a sensitive, key

relationship of human existence, central to family life, community

welfare and the development of human personality.                 Justice

Blackmun went on to observe:-

157. In A.R. Coeriel and M.A.R. Aurik v. The Netherlands68, the

Human Rights Committee observed that the notion of privacy refers

to the sphere of a person's life in which he or she can freely express

his or her identity, be it by entering into relationships with others or66Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986)67413 U.S. 49 (1973)68Communication No. 453/1991, para. 10.2101alone. The Committee was of the view that a person's surname

constitutes an important component of one's identity and that the

protection against arbitrary or unlawful interference with one's privacy

includes the protection against arbitrary or unlawful interference with

the right to choose and change one's own name.

158. We may also usefully refer to the views of the Human Rights

Committee in Toonen v. Australia69 to the effect that the introduction

of the concept of arbitrariness is intended to guarantee that every

interference provided for by the law should be in accordance with the

provisions, aims and objectives of the Covenant and should be, in

any event, reasonable in the circumstances. The requirement of

reasonableness implies that any interference with privacy must be

proportional to the end sought and be necessary in the circumstances

of any given case.

159. The South African Constitutional Court in National Coalition

for Gay and Lesbian Equality and another v. Minister of Justice

and others 70 has arrived at a theory of privacy in sexuality that

includes both decisional and relational elements. It lays down that

privacy recognises that we all have a right to a sphere of private69Communication No. 488/1992, U.C. Doc CCPR/C/ 50/D 488/ 1992, March 31, 1994, para. 8.3701998 (12) BCLR 1517 (CC)102intimacy and autonomy which allows us to establish and nurture

human relationships without interference from the outside community.

The way in which we give expression to our sexuality is at the core of

this area of private intimacy. If, in expressing our sexuality, we act

consensually and without harming one another, invasion of that

precinct will be a breach of our privacy. The Court admitted that the

society had a poor record of seeking to regulate the sexual

expression of South Africans. It observed that in some cases, as in

this one, the reason for the regulation was discriminatory; the law, for

example, outlawed sexual relationships among people of different

races. The fact that a law prohibiting forms of sexual conduct is

discriminatory does not, however, prevent it at the same time from

being an improper invasion of the intimate sphere of human life to

which protection is given by the Constitution inSection 14. The Court

emphasized that the importance of a right to privacy in the new

constitutional order should not be denied even while acknowledging

the importance of equality. In fact, emphasising the breach of both

these rights in the present case highlights just how egregious the

invasion of the constitutional rights of gay persons has been. The

offence which lies at the heart of the discrimination in this case103constitutes, at the same time and independently, a breach of the

rights of privacy and dignity which, without doubt, strengthens the

conclusion that the discrimination is unfair.

160. At home, the view as to the right to privacy underwent a sea-

change when a nine-Judge Bench of this Court inPuttaswamy(supra) elevated the right to privacy to the stature of fundamental

right underArticle 21of the Constitution. One of us, Chandrachud, J.,

speaking for the majority, regarded the judgment in Suresh Koushal

as a discordant note and opined that the reasons stated therein

cannot be regarded as a valid constitutional basis for disregarding a

claim based on privacy underArticle 21of the Constitution. Further,

he observed that the reasoning in Suresh Koushal‘s decision to the

effect that ―a minuscule fraction of the country's population

constitutes lesbians, gays, bisexuals or transgenders"       is not a

sustainable basis to deny the right to privacy.

161. It was further observed that the purpose of elevating certain

rights to the stature of guaranteed fundamental rights is to insulate

their exercise from the disdain of majorities, whether legislative or

popular, and the guarantee of constitutional rights does not depend

upon their exercise being favourably regarded by majoritarian opinion.104

162. The test of popular acceptance, in view of the majority opinion,

was not at all a valid basis to disregard rights which have been

conferred with the sanctity of constitutional protection. The Court

noted that the discrete and insular minorities face grave dangers of

discrimination for the simple reason that their views, beliefs or way of

life does not accord with the 'mainstream', but in a democratic

Constitution founded on the Rule of Law, it does not mean that their

rights are any less sacred than those conferred on other citizens.

163. As far as the aspect of sexual orientation is concerned, the

Court opined that it is an essential attribute of privacy and

discrimination against an individual on the basis of sexual orientation

is deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual. The

Court was of the view that equality demands that the sexual

orientation of each individual in the society must be protected on an

even platform, for the right to privacy and the protection of sexual

orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed byArticles 14, 15and21of the Constitution.

164. Regarding the view in Suresh Koushal‘s case to the effect that

the Delhi High Court inNaz Foundationcase had erroneously relied

upon international precedents in its anxiety to protect the so-called105rights of LGBT persons, the nine-Judge Bench was of the opinion that

the aforesaid view inSuresh Koushal(supra) was unsustainable.The rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population,

as per the decision inPuttaswamy(supra), cannot be construed to

be "so-called rights" as the expression "so-called" seems to suggest

the exercise of liberty in the garb of a right which is illusory.

165. The Court regarded such a construction in Suresh Koushal‘s

case as inappropriate of the privacy based claims of the LGBT

population, for their rights are not at all "so-called" but are real rights

founded on sound constitutional doctrine. The Court went on to

observe that the rights of the LGBT community inhere in the right to

life, dwell in privacy and dignity and they constitute the essence of

liberty and freedom. Further, the Court observed that sexual

orientation being an essential component of identity, equal protection

demands equal protection of the identity of every individual without

discrimination.

166. Speaking in the same tone and tenor, Kaul, J., while concurring

with the view of Chandrachud, J., observed that the right to privacy

cannot be denied even if there is a minuscule fraction of the

population which is affected. He was of the view that the majoritarian106concept does not apply to constitutional rights and the Courts are

often called upon to take what may be categorized as a non-

majoritarian view.

167. Kaul, J. went on to opine that one‘s sexual orientation is

undoubtedly an attribute of privacy and in support of this view, he

referred to the observations made in Mosley (supra) which read

thus:-

168. After the nine-Judge bench decision inPuttaswamy(supra),

the challenge to the vires ofSection 377IPC has been stronger than

ever. It needs to be underscored that inthe said decision, the nine-

Judge Bench has held that sexual orientation is also a facet of a

person's privacy and that the right to privacy is a fundamental right

under the Constitution of India.

169. The observation made inSuresh Koushal(supra) that gays,

lesbians, bisexuals and transgenders constitute a very minuscule part

of the population is perverse due to the very reason that such an

approach would be violative of the equality principle enshrined underArticle 14of the Constitution. The mere fact that the percentage of

population whose fundamental right to privacy is being abridged by

the existence of Section 377 in its present form is low does not

impose a limitation upon this Court from protecting the fundamental

rights of those who are so affected by the presentSection 377IPC.

170. The constitutional framers could have never intended that the

protection of fundamental rights was only for the majority population.108If such had been the intention, then all provisions in Part III of the

Constitution would have contained qualifying words such as 'majority

persons' or 'majority citizens'. Instead, the provisions have employed

the words 'any person‘ and ‗any citizen' making it manifest that the

constitutional courts are under an obligation to protect the

fundamental rights of every single citizen without waiting for the

catastrophic situation when the fundamental rights of the majority of

citizens get violated.

171. Such a view is well supported on two counts, namely, one that

the constitutional courts have to embody in their approach a

telescopic vision wherein they inculcate the ability to be futuristic and

do not procrastinate till the day when the number of citizens whose

fundamental rights are affected and violated grow in figures. In the

case at hand, whatever be the percentage of gays, lesbians,

bisexuals and transgenders, this Court is not concerned with the

number of persons belonging to the LGBT community. What matters

is whether this community is entitled to certain fundamental rights

which they claim and whether such fundamental rights are being

violated due to the presence of a law in the statute book. If the

answer to both these questions is in the affirmative, then the109constitutional courts must not display an iota of doubt and must not

hesitate in striking down such provision of law on the account of it

being violative of the fundamental rights of certain citizens, however

minuscule their percentage may be.

172. A second count on which the view inSuresh Koushal(supra)

becomes highly unsustainable is that the language of bothArticles 32and226of the Constitution is not reflective of such an intention. A

cursory reading of both the Articles divulges that the right to move the

Supreme Court and the High Courts underArticles 32and226respectively is not limited to a situation when there is violation of the

fundamental rights of a large chunk of populace.

173. Such a view is also fortified by several landmark judgments of

the Supreme Court such asD.K. Basu v. State of W.B.71wherein the

Court was concerned with the fundamental rights of only those

persons who were put under arrest and which again formed a

minuscule fraction of the total populace.Another recent case wherein

the Supreme Court while discharging its constitutional duty did not

hesitate to protect the fundamental right to die with dignity isCommon Cause (A Regd. Society) (supra) wherein the Supreme71(1997) 1 SCC 416110Court stepped in to protect the said fundamental right of those who

may have slipped into permanent vegetative state, who again form a

very minuscule part of the society.

174. Such an approach reflects the idea as also mooted by Martin

Luther King Jr. who said, ―Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice

everywhere‖. While propounding this view, we are absolutely

conscious of the concept of reasonable classification and the fact that

even single person legislation could be valid as held inChiranjit Lal

Chowdhury v. Union of India72, which regarded the classification to

be reasonable from both procedural and substantive points of view.

175. We are aware that the legislature is fully competent to enact

laws which are applicable only to a particular class or group. But, for

the classification to be valid, it must be founded on an intelligible

differentia and the differentia must have a rational nexus with the

object sought to be achieved by a particular provision of law.

176. That apart, since it is alleged thatSection 377IPC in its present

form violates a fundamental right protected byArticle 21of the

Constitution, that is, the right to personal liberty, it has to not only

stand the test ofArticle 21but it must also stand the test ofArticle 1972[1950] 1SCR 869111which is to say that the restriction imposed by it has to be reasonable

and also that ofArticle 14which is to say that Section 377 must not

be arbitrary.

177. Whether Section 377 stands the trinity test ofArticles 14, 19and21as propounded in the case ofManeka Gandhi(supra) will be

ascertained and determined at a later stage of this judgment when we

get into the interpretative dissection ofSection 377IPC.

M.    Doctrine of progressive realization of rights

178. When we talk about the rights guaranteed under the

Constitution and the protection of these rights, we observe and

comprehend a manifest ascendance and triumphant march of such

rights which, in turn, paves the way for the doctrine of progressive

realization of the rights under the Constitution. This doctrine

invariably reminds us about the living and dynamic nature of a

Constitution. Edmund Burke, delineating upon the progressive and

the perpetual growing nature of a Constitution, had said that a

Constitution is ever-growing and it is perpetually continuous as it

embodies the spirit of a nation. It is enriched at the present by the

past experiences and influences and makes the future richer than the

present.

179.InN.M. Thomas(supra), Krishna Iyer, J., in his concurring

opinion, observed thus:-

And again:-

Naturally surges the interrogation, what are the
           challenges of changing values to which the guarantee
           of equality must respond and how?‖

180. Further, Krishna Iyer, J. referred to the classic statement made

by Chief Justice Marshall in McCulloch v. Maryland 73 which was

also followed by Justice Brennan in Kazenbach v. Morgan74. The

said observation reads thus:-

181.InManoj Narula(supra), the Court recognized the dynamic

nature of the Indian Constitution and observed that it is a living

document with capabilities of enormous dynamism. It is a Constitution

made for a progressive society and the working of such a Constitution

depends upon the prevalent atmosphere and conditions.

182.InGovernment of NCT of Delhi(supra), the Court, while

contemplating on what is it that makes a Constitution a dynamic and

a living document, observed that it is the philosophy of 'constitutional

culture' which, as a set of norms and practices, breathes life into the73(1816) 17 US 31674(1966) 384 US 641114words of the great document and it constantly enables the words to

keep stride with the rapid and swift changes occurring in the society

and the responsibility of fostering a constitutional culture rests upon

the shoulders of the State. Thereafter, the Court went on to observe:-

183. We have discussed, in brief, the dynamic and progressive

nature of the Constitution to accentuate that rights under the

Constitution are also dynamic and progressive, for they evolve with115the evolution of a society and with the passage of time. The rationale

behind the doctrine of progressive realization of rights is the dynamic

and ever growing nature of the Constitution under which the rights

have been conferred to the citizenry.

184.           The constitutional courts have to recognize that the

constitutional rights would become a dead letter without their dynamic,

vibrant and pragmatic interpretation. Therefore, it is necessary for the

constitutional courts to inculcate in their judicial interpretation and

decision making a sense of engagement and a sense of constitutional

morality so that they, with the aid of judicial creativity, are able to fulfill

their foremost constitutional obligation, that is, to protect the rights

bestowed upon the citizens of our country by the Constitution.

185. Here, it is also apposite to refer to the words of Lord Roskill in

his presidential address to the Bentham Club at University College of

London on February 29, 1984 on the subject 'Law Lords,

Reactionaries or Reformers'75 which read as follows:-

[Emphasis supplied]

186. What the words of Lord Roskill suggest is that it is not only the

interpretation of the Constitution which needs to be pragmatic, due to

the dynamic nature of a Constitution, but also the legal policy of a

particular epoch must be in consonance with the current and the

present needs of the society, which are sensible in the prevalent

times and at the same time easy to apply.

187. This also gives birth to an equally important role of the State to

implement the constitutional rights effectively. And of course, when

we say State, it includes all the three organs, that is, the legislature,117the executive as well as the judiciary. The State has to show

concerned commitment which would result in concrete action. The

State has an obligation to take appropriate measures for the

progressive realization of economic, social and cultural rights.

188. The doctrine of progressive realization of rights, as a natural

corollary, gives birth to the doctrine of non-retrogression. As per this

doctrine, there must not be any regression of rights. In a progressive

and an ever-improving society, there is no place for retreat. The

society has to march ahead.

189. The doctrine of non-retrogression sets forth that the State

should not take measures or steps that deliberately lead to

retrogression on the enjoyment of rights either under the Constitution

or otherwise.

190. The aforesaid two doctrines lead us to the irresistible

conclusion that if we were to accept the law enunciated inSuresh

Koushal's case, it would definitely tantamount to a retrograde step in

the direction of the progressive interpretation of the Constitution and

denial of progressive realization of rights.    It is because Suresh

Koushal’s view gets wrongly embedded with the minuscule facet and

assumes criminality on the bedrock being guided by a sense of social118morality. It discusses about health which is no more a phobia and is

further moved by the popular morality while totally ignoring the

concepts of privacy, individual choice and the orientation. Orientation,

in certain senses, does get the neuro-impulse to express while seeing

the other gender. That apart, swayed by data, Suresh Koushal fails

to appreciate that the sustenance of fundamental rights does not

require majoritarian sanction. Thus, the ruling becomes sensitively

susceptible.

191. The Supreme Court of the United States in Obergefell, et al. v.

Hodges, Director, Ohio Department of Health, et al.76, highlighting

the plight of homosexuals, observed that until the mid-20th century,

same-sex intimacy had long been condemned as immoral by the

State itself in most Western nations and a belief was often embodied

in the criminal law and for this reason, homosexuals, among others,

were not deemed to have dignity in their own distinct identity. The

Court further noted that truthful declaration by same-sex couples of

what was in their hearts had to remain unspoken and even when a


76576   US (2015)119greater awareness of the humanity and integrity of homosexual

persons came in the period after World War II, the argument that

gays and lesbians had a just claim to dignity was in conflict with both

law and widespread social conventions. The Court also observed that

same-sex intimacy remained a crime in many States and that gays

and lesbians were prohibited from most government employment,

barred from military service, excluded under immigration laws,

targeted by the police and burdened in their rights to associate.

192. The Court further observed that what the statutes in question

seek to control is a personal relationship, whether or not entitled to

formal recognition in the law, that is within the liberty of persons to

choose without being punished as criminals. Further, the Court

acknowledged that adults may choose to enter upon a relationship in

the confines of their homes and their own private lives and still retain

their dignity as free persons and that when sexuality finds overt

expression in intimate conduct with another person, the conduct can

be but one element in a personal bond that is more enduring. The

Court held that such liberty protected by the Constitution allows

homosexual persons the right to make this choice.120

193. In the case of Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins77, the Supreme

Court of the United States, while evaluating the legal relevance of sex

stereotyping, observed thus:-

194. In the case of Kimberly Hively v. Ivy Tech Community

College of Indiana 78 , while holding that discrimination amongst

employees           based       on   their   sexual   orientation   amounts   to

discrimination based on sex, the Court observed as under:-

Id. at *5 (proffering the example of a woman who is
        suspended for placing a photo of her female spouse on
        her desk, and a man who faces no consequences for the

77490U.S. 228 (1989)78830 F.3d 698 (7th Cir. 2016)121same act). Second, it explained that "sexual orientation
          discrimination is also sex discrimination because it is
          associational discrimination on the basis of sex," in which
          an employer discriminates against lesbian, gay, or
          bisexual employees based on who they date or marry. Id.
          at *6-7. Finally, the EEOC described sexual orientation
          discrimination as a form of discrimination based on
          gender stereotypes in which employees are harassed or
          punished for failing to live up to societal norms about
          appropriate     masculine     and    feminine    behaviors,
          mannerisms, and appearances. Id. In coming to these
          conclusions, the EEOC noted critically that "courts have
          attempted to distinguish discrimination based on sexual
          orientation from discrimination based on sex, even while
          noting that the "borders [between the two classes] are
          imprecise." Id. at *8 (quoting Simonton, 232 F.3d at 35).

[Underlining is ours]

195. In the case of Lawrence v. Texas79, while dealing with the

issue of decriminalization of sexual conduct between homosexuals,

the U.S. Supreme Court observed that the said issue neither involved

minors nor persons who might be injured or coerced or who are

situated in relationships where consent might not easily be refused

nor did it          involve public conduct or prostitution nor the question

whether the government must give formal recognition to any

relationship that homosexual persons seek to enter. The Court further

observed that the issue related to two adults who, with full and mutual

consent of each other, engaged in sexual practices common to a

79   539 U.S. 558 (2003)122homosexual lifestyle. The Court declared that the petitioners were

entitled to respect for their private lives and that the State could not

demean their existence or control their destiny by making their private

sexual conduct a crime, for their right to liberty under the Due

Process Clause gives them the full right to engage in their conduct

without the intervention of the State.

196. In Roberts v. United States Jaycees80, the Supreme Court of

the United States observed:-

[Emphasis added]



80468   U.S. 609 (1984)123

(ii)   Canada

197. The Supreme Court of Canada, in Delwin Vriend and others

v. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Alberta and others81, while

interpreting a breach ofSection 15(1)of the Canadian Charter of

Rights and Freedoms, arrived at the conclusion that 'sex' includes

sexual orientation.Section 15(1)of the Charter reads thus:-

198. In Delwin Vriend, the Supreme Court of Canada, relying on the

reasoning adopted by it in Egan v. Canada (supra), applied its well-

known test of grounds analogous to those specified textually. The

Egan test is:-

Second "whether that distinction has the effect on the
       claimant of imposing a burden, obligation or
       disadvantage not imposed upon others or of
       withholding or limiting access to benefits or
       advantages which are available to others" (para. 131).81[1998] 1 SCR 493124A discriminatory distinction was also described as one
     which is "capable of either promoting or perpetuating
     the view that the individual adversely affected by this
     distinction is less capable, or less worthy of recognition
     or value as a human being or as a member of
     Canadian society, equally deserving of concern,
     respect, and consideration" (Egan, at para. 56, per
     L'Heureux - Dube J.). It may as well be appropriate to
     consider whether the unequal treatment is based on
     "the stereotypical application of presumed group or
     personal characteristics" (Miron, at para. 128, per
     McLachlin J.)

     In Egan, it was held, on the basis of "historical social,
     political and economic disadvantage suffered by
     homosexuals" and the emerging consensus among
     legislatures (at para. 176), as well as previous judicial
     decisions (at para. 177), that sexual orientation is a
     ground analogous to those listed ins. 15(1). Sexual
     orientation is "a deeply personal characteristic that is
     either unchangeable or changeable only at
     unacceptable personal costs" (para. 5). It is analogous
     to the other personal characteristics enumerated ins.
     15(1); and therefore this step of the test is satisfied."

199. Thereafter, the Court in Delwin Vriend (supra) observed that

perhaps the most important outcome is the psychological harm which

may ensue from the state of affairs as the fear of discrimination (by

LGBT) would logically lead them to concealment of true identity and

this is harmful to their personal confidence and self-esteem. The

Court held that this is a clear example of a distinction which demeans

the individual and strengthens and perpetrates the view that gays and125lesbians are less worthy of protection as individuals in Canada‘s

society and the potential harm to the dignity and perceived worth of

gay and lesbian individuals constitutes a particularly cruel form of

discrimination.

(iii)   South Africa

200. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in National Coalition

for Gay & Lesbian Equality (supra) made the following relevant

observations:-

(iv)   United Kingdom

201. In Euan Sutherland v. United Kingdom82, the issue before

the European Commission of Human Rights was whether the

difference in age limit for consent for sexual activities for

homosexuals and heterosexuals, the age limit being 16 years in

the case of heterosexuals and 18 years in the case of

homosexuals, is justified.         While considering the same, the

Commission       observed   that     no    objective   and   reasonable

justification exists for the maintenance of a higher minimum age of

consent in case of male homosexuals as compared to

heterosexuals and that the application discloses discriminatory

treatment in the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for

private life underArticle 8of the Convention. The Commission

further observed that sexual orientation was usually established

before the age of puberty in both boys and girls and referred to

evidence that reducing the age of consent would unlikely affect the

majority of men engaging in homosexual activity, either in general

or within specific age groups. The Council of the British Medical

Association (BMA) concluded in its Report that the age of consent822001 ECHR 234127for homosexual men should be set at 16 since the then existing

law might inhibit efforts to improve the sexual health of young

homosexual and bisexual men. An equal age of consent was also

supported by the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Health

Education Authority and the National Association of Probation

Officers as well as by other bodies and organizations concerned

with health and social welfare. It is further noted that equality of

treatment in respect of the age of consent is now recognized by

the great majority of Member States of the Council of Europe.

(v)        Other Courts/Jurisdictions

202. In Ang Ladlad LGBT Party v. Commission of Elections83, the

Supreme Court of the Republic of the Philippines observed:-

203. Further, in Toonen‘s case, the Human Rights Committee made

the following relevant observations:-

204. In Dudgeon (supra), the European Court of Human Rights

made the following observations with respect to homosexuality:-

[Emphasis supplied]

O.   Comparative analysis of Section 375 and Section 377 IPC

205. Let us, in the obtaining situation, conduct a comparative

analysis of the offence of rape and unnatural offences as defined

under Section 375 andSection 377of the IPC respectively.Section

375IPC defines the offence of rape and reads as under:-130

Secondly. —Without her consent.

Thirdly. —With her consent, when her consent has
been obtained by putting her or any person in whom
she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt.

Fourthly. —With her consent, when the man knows
that he is not her husband and that her consent is
given because she believes that he is another man to
whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married.

Fifthly. —With her consent when, at the time of giving
such consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or
intoxication or the administration by him personally or
through another of any stupefying or unwholesome131substance, she is unable to understand the nature and
     consequences of that to which she gives consent.

     Sixthly. —With or without her consent, when she is
     under eighteen years of age.

Seventhly. —When she is unable to communicate
     consent.

Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section,
     "vagina" shall also include labia majora.

Explanation 2. — Consent means an unequivocal
     voluntary agreement when the woman by words,
     gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal
     communication,       communicates       willingness to
     participate in the specific sexual act:

in the case of coitus per os is impossible. Thus, the most common

argument against homosexuality and criminalization of carnal

intercourse even between consenting adults of opposite sex is that

traditionally, the essential purpose of sex is to procreate.

215. With the passage of time and evolution of the society,

procreation is not the only reason for which people choose to come

together, have live-in relationships, perform coitus or even marry.

They do so for a whole lot of reasons including emotional

companionship. Homer Clark writes:-

216. In the contemporary world where even marriage is now not

equated to procreation of children, the question that would arise is

whether homosexuality and carnal intercourse between consenting

adults of opposite sex can be tagged as ‗against the order of nature‘.

It is the freedom of choice of two consenting adults to perform sex for

procreation or otherwise and if their choice is that of the latter, it

cannot be said to be against the order of nature. Therefore, sex, if

performed differently, as per the choice of the consenting adults,137does not per se make it against the order of nature.

217. Section 377 criminalises even voluntary carnal intercourse not

only between homosexuals but also between heterosexuals. The

major difference between the language of Section 377 and Section

375 is that of the element of absence consent which has been

elaborately incorporated in the seven descriptions contained in the

latter part ofSection 375IPC. It is the absence of willful and informed

consent embodied in the seven descriptions to Section 375 which

makes the offence of rape criminal.

218. On the other hand,Section 377IPC contains no such

descriptions/exceptions embodying the absence of willful and

informed consent and criminalises even voluntary carnal intercourse

both between homosexuals as well as between heterosexuals. While

saying so, we gain strength and support from the fact that the

legislature, in its wisdom, while enactingSection 375IPC in its

amended form after theCriminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013, has

not employed the words ―subject to any other provision of theIPC‖.

The implication of the absence of these words simply indicates thatSection 375IPC which does not criminalize consensual carnal

intercourse between heterosexuals is not subject toSection 377IPC.138

219. Section 377, so far as it criminalises carnal intercourse

between heterosexuals is legally unsustainable in its present form for

the simple reason thatSection 375IPC clearly stipulates that carnal

intercourse between a man and a woman with the willful and

informed consent of the woman does not amount to rape and is not

penal.

220. Despite the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 coming into

force, by virtue of which Section 375 was amended, whereby the

words ‗sexual intercourse‘ in Section 375 were replaced by four

elaborate clauses from (a) to (d) giving a wide definition to the

offence of rape,Section 377IPC still remains in the statute book in

the same form. Such an anomaly, if allowed to persist, may result in a

situation wherein a heterosexual couple who indulges in carnal

intercourse with the willful and informed consent of each other may

be held liable for the offence of unnatural sex underSection 377IPC,

despite the fact that such an act would not be rape within the

definition as provided underSection 375IPC.

221. Drawing an analogy, if consensual carnal intercourse between

a heterosexual couple does not amount to rape, it definitely should

not be labelled and designated as unnatural offence underSection139377IPC. If any proclivity amongst the heterosexual population

towards consensual carnal intercourse has been allowed due to theCriminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013, such kind of proclivity amongst

any two persons including LGBT community cannot be treated as

untenable so long as it is consensual and it is confined within their

most private and intimate spaces.

222. There is another aspect which needs to be discussed, which is

whether criminalisation of carnal intercourse under Section 377

serves any useful purpose under the prevalent criminal law.

Delineating on this aspect, the European Commission of Human

Rights in Dudgeon (supra) opined thus:-

223. At the very least, it can be said that criminalisation of

consensual      carnal   intercourse,      be   it   amongst   homosexuals,

heterosexuals, bi-sexuals or transgenders, hardly serves any

legitimate public purpose or interest. Per contra, we are inclined to

believe that if Section 377 remains in its present form in the statute

book, it will allow the harassment and exploitation of the LGBT

community to prevail. We must make it clear that freedom of choice

cannot be scuttled or abridged on the threat of criminal prosecution

and made paraplegic on the mercurial stance of majoritarian

perception.

P.   The litmus test for survival of Section 377 IPC

224. Having discussed the various principles and concepts and

bearing in mind the sacrosanctity of the fundamental rights which141guides the constitutional courts, we shall now proceed to deal with

the constitutionality ofSection 377IPC on the bedrock of the

principles enunciated inArticles 14, 19and21of the Constitution.

225. It is axiomatic that the expression ‗life or personal liberty‘ inArticle 21embodies within itself a variety of rights.InManeka

Gandhi(supra), Bhagwati, J. (as he then was) observed:-

226.InAnuj Garg(supra), while dealing with the constitutional

validity ofSection 30of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 prohibiting

employment of ―any man under the age of 25 years‖ or ―any woman‖,

the Court, holding it ultra vires, ruled thus:-

227.InCommon Cause (A Regd. Society) (supra), the Court, in

the context of right to dignity, observed:-

228.InPuttaswamy(supra), the right to privacy has been declared

to be a fundamental right by this Court as being a facet of life and

personal liberty protected underArticle 21of the Constitution.

229. In view of the above authorities, we have no hesitation to say

thatSection 377IPC, in its present form, abridges both human dignity

as well as the fundamental right to privacy and choice of the citizenry,

howsoever small. As sexual orientation is an essential and innate

facet of privacy, the right to privacy takes within its sweep the right of

every individual including that of the LGBT to express their choices in

terms of sexual inclination without the fear of persecution or criminal

prosecution.

230. The sexual autonomy of an individual to choose his/her sexual

partner is an important pillar and an insegregable facet of individual143liberty. When the liberty of even a single person of the society is

smothered under some vague and archival stipulation that it is

against the order of nature or under the perception that the majority

population is peeved when such an individual exercises his/her liberty

despite the fact that the exercise of such liberty is within the confines

of his/her private space, then the signature of life melts and living

becomes a bare subsistence and resultantly, the fundamental right of

liberty of such an individual is abridged.

231. While saying so, we are absolutely conscious of the fact that

the citizenry may be deprived of their right to life and personal liberty

if the conditionslaid down inArticle 21are fulfilled and if, at the same

time, the procedure established by law aslaid down inManeka

Gandhi(supra) is satisfied.Article 21requires that for depriving a

person of his right to life and personal liberty, there has to be a law

and the said law must prescribe a fair procedure. The seminal point

is to see whether Section 377 withstands the sanctity of dignity of an

individual, expression of choice, paramount concept of life and

whether it allows an individual to lead to a life that one‘s natural

orientation commands. That apart, more importantly, the question is

whether such a gender-neutral offence, with the efflux of time, should144be allowed to remain in the statute book especially when there is

consent and such consent elevates the status of bodily autonomy.

Hence, the provision has to be tested on the principles evolved underArticles 14, 19and21of the Constitution.

232.InSunil Batra v. Delhi Administrationand others85, Krishna

Iyer, J. opined that what is punitively outrageous, scandalizingly

unusual or cruel and rehabilitatively counterproductive, is unarguably

unreasonable and arbitrary and is shot down byArticle 14and19and

if inflicted with procedural unfairness, falls foul ofArticle 21.

233. We, first, must test the validity ofSection 377IPC on the anvil

ofArticle 14of the Constitution. WhatArticle 14propounds is that ‗all

like should be treated alike‘. In other words, it implies equal treatment

for all equals. Though the legislature is fully empowered to enact laws

applicable to a particular class, as in the case at hand in which

Section 377 applies to citizens who indulge in carnal intercourse, yet

the classification, including the one made underSection 377IPC, has

to satisfy the twin conditions to the effect that the classification must

be founded on an intelligible differentia and the said differentia must



85AIR   1978 SC 1675 : (1978) 4 SCC 494145have a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the

provision, that is,Section 377IPC.

234.InM. Nagaraj and others v. Union of Indiaand others86, it

has been held:-

235.InE.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Naduand another87, this

Court observed that equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects

and dimensions and it cannot be "cribbed, cabined and confined"

236.InBudhan Choudhry v. The State of Bihar, while

delineating on the concept of reasonable classification, the Court

observed thus:-

86

237. A perusal ofSection 377IPC reveals that it classifies and

penalizes persons who indulge in carnal intercourse with the object to

protect women and children from being subjected to carnal

intercourse. That being so, now it is to be ascertained whether this

classification has a reasonable nexus with the object sought to be

achieved. The answer is in the negative as the non-consensual acts

which have been criminalized by virtue ofSection 377IPC have

already been designated as penal offences underSection 375IPC

and under thePOCSO Act. Per contra, the presence of this Section

in its present form has resulted in a distasteful and objectionable147collateral effect whereby even ‗consensual acts‘, which are neither

harmful to children nor women and are performed by a certain class

of people (LGBTs) owning to some inherent characteristics defined

by their identity and individuality, have been woefully targeted. This

discrimination and unequal treatment meted out to the LGBT

community as a separate class of citizens is unconstitutional for being

violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution.

238.InShayara Bano(supra), the Court observed that manifest

arbitrariness of a provision of law can also be a ground for declaring a

law as unconstitutional. Opining so, the Court observed thus:-

239.In view of the lawlaid down inShayara Bano(supra) and

given the fact that Section 377 criminalises even consensual sexual

acts between adults, it fails to make a distinction between

consensual and non-consensual sexual acts between competent148adults. Further,Section 377IPC fails to take into account that

consensual sexual acts between adults in private space are neither

harmful nor contagious to the society. On the contrary, Section 377

trenches a discordant note in respect of the liberty of persons

belonging to the LGBT community by subjecting them to societal

pariah and dereliction. Needless to say, the Section also interferes

with consensual acts of competent adults in private space. Sexual

acts cannot be viewed from the lens of social morality or that of

traditional precepts wherein sexual acts were considered only for the

purpose of procreation. This being the case,Section 377IPC, so

long as it criminalises consensual sexual acts of whatever nature

between competent adults, is manifestly arbitrary.

240. The LGBT community possess the same human, fundamental

and constitutional rights as other citizens do since these rights inhere

in individuals as natural and human rights. We must remember that

equality is the edifice on which the entire non-discrimination

jurisprudence rests. Respect for individual choice is the very essence

of liberty under law and, thus, criminalizing carnal intercourse underSection 377IPC is irrational, indefensible and manifestly arbitrary. It

is true that the principle of choice can never be absolute under a149liberal Constitution and the law restricts one individual‘s choice to

prevent harm or injury to others. However, the organisation of

intimate relations is a matter of complete personal choice especially

between consenting adults. It is a vital personal right falling within the

private protective sphere and realm of individual choice and

autonomy. Such progressive proclivity is rooted in the constitutional

structure and is an inextricable part of human nature.

241. In the adverting situation, we must also examine whether

Section 377, in its present form, stands the test ofArticle 19of the

Constitution in the sense of whether it is unreasonable and, therefore,

violative ofArticle 19.InChintaman Rao v. State of Madhya

Pradesh89, this Court, in the context of reasonable restrictions underArticle 19, opined thus:-

242.InS. Rangarajan v. P. Jagjivan Ramand others90, the Court

observed, though in a different context, thus:-

243.InS. Khushboo(supra), this Court, while observing that

‗morality and decency‘ on the basis of which reasonable restrictions

can be imposed on the rights guaranteed underArticle 19should not

be amplified        beyond a rational and logical limit, ruled that even

though the constitutional freedom of speech and expression is not

absolute and can be subjected to reasonable restrictions on grounds

such as `decency and morality' among others, yet it is necessary to

tolerate unpopular views in the socio-cultural space.

244.In the case ofShreya Singhal v. Union of India91, this Court,

while striking downSection 66Aof the Information Technology Act,

2000, had observed that when a provision is vague and overboard in90(1989) 2 SCC 57491(2015) 5 SCC 1151the sense that it criminalises protected speech and speech of

innocent nature, resultantly, it has a chilling effect and is liable to be

struck down. The Court opined:-

245. In the obtaining situation, we need to check whether public

order, decency and morality as grounds to limit the fundamental right

of expression including choice can be accepted as reasonable

restrictions to uphold the validity ofSection 377IPC. We are of the

conscious view thatSection 377IPC takes within its fold private acts

of adults including the LGBT community which are not only

consensual but are also innocent, as such acts neither cause

disturbance to the public order nor are they injurious to public

decency or morality. The law is et domus sua cuique est tutissimum

refugium – A man‘s house is his castle. Sir Edward Coke92 said:-

246. That apart, any display of affection amongst the members of

the LGBT community towards their partners in the public so long as it

does not amount to indecency or has the potentiality to disturb public

order cannot be bogged down by majority perception.Section 377IPC amounts to unreasonable restriction as it makes carnal

intercourse between consenting adults within their castle a criminal

offence which is manifestly not only overboard and vague but also

has a chilling effect on an individual‘s freedom of choice.

247. In view of the testlaid down inthe aforesaid authorities,Section

377IPC does not meet the criteria of proportionality and is violative of

the fundamental right of freedom of expression including the right to

choose a sexual partner.Section 377IPC also assumes the

characteristic of unreasonableness, for it becomes a weapon in the

hands of the majority to seclude, exploit and harass the LGBT

community. It shrouds the lives of the LGBT community in criminality

and constant fear mars their joy of life. They constantly face social

prejudice, disdain and are subjected to the shame of being their very

natural selves. Thus, an archaic law which is incompatible with

constitutional values cannot be allowed to be preserved.

248. Bigoted     and    homophobic       attitudes   dehumanize      the153transgenders by denying them their dignity, personhood and above

all, their basic human rights. It is important to realize that identity and

sexual orientation cannot be silenced by oppression. Liberty, as the

linchpin of our constitutional values, enables individuals to define and

express their identity and individual identity has to be acknowledged

and respected.

249. The     very   existence    ofSection   377IPC   criminalising

transgenders casts a great stigma on an already oppressed and

discriminated class of people. This stigma, oppression and prejudice

has to be eradicated and the transgenders have to progress from

their narrow claustrophobic spaces of mere survival in hiding with

their isolation and fears to enjoying the richness of living out of the

shadows with full realization of their potential and equal opportunities

in all walks of life. The ideals and objectives enshrined in our

benevolent Constitution can be achieved only when each and every

individual is empowered and enabled to participate in the social

mainstream and in the journey towards achieving equality in all

spheres, equality of opportunities in all walks of life, equal freedoms

and rights and, above all, equitable justice. This can be achieved

only by inclusion of all and exclusion of none from the mainstream.154

250. We must realize that different hues and colours together make

the painting of humanity beautiful and this beauty is the essence of

humanity. We need to respect the strength of our diversity so as to

sustain our unity as a cohesive unit of free citizens by fostering

tolerance and respect for each others‘ rights thereby progressing

towards harmonious and peaceful co-existence in the supreme bond

of humanity. Attitudes and mentality have to change to accept the

distinct identity of individuals and respect them for who they are

rather than compelling them to ‗become‘ who they are not. All human

beings possess the equal right to be themselves instead of

transitioning or conditioning themselves as per the perceived

dogmatic notions of a group of people. To change the societal bias

and root out the weed, it is the foremost duty of each one of us to

―stand up and speak up‖ against the slightest form of discrimination

against transgenders that we come across. Let us move from

darkness to light, from bigotry to tolerance and from the winter of

mere survival to the spring of life ― as the herald of a New India ― to

a more inclusive society.

251. It is through times of grave disappointment, denunciation,

adversity,   grief, injustice and despair that the transgenders have155stood firm with their formidable spirit, inspired commitment, strong

determination and infinite hope and belief that has made them look

for the rainbow in every cloud and lead the way to a future that would

be the harbinger of liberation and emancipation from a certain

bondage indescribable in words – towards the basic recognition of

dignity and humanity of all and towards leading a life without pretence

eschewing duality and ambivalence. It is their momentous ―walk to

freedom‖ and journey to a constitutional ethos of dignity, equality and

liberty and this freedom can only be fulfilled in its truest sense when

each of us realize that the LGBT community possess equal rights as

any other citizen in the country under the magnificent charter of rights

– our Constitution.

252. Thus analysed,Section 377IPC, so far as it penalizes any

consensual sexual activity between two adults, be it homosexuals

(man and a man), heterosexuals (man and a woman) and lesbians

(woman and a woman), cannot be regarded as constitutional.

However, if anyone, by which we mean both a man and a woman,

engages in any kind of sexual activity with an animal, the said aspect

ofSection 377IPC is constitutional and it shall remain a penal

offence underSection 377IPC. Any act of the description covered156underSection 377IPC done between the individuals without the

consent of any one of them would invite penal liability underSection

377IPC.

Q.          Conclusions

253. In view of the aforesaid analysis, we record our conclusions in

seriatim:-

With the same spirit, we must recognize that the concept of

              identity which has a constitutional tenability cannot be

              pigeon-holed singularly to one‘s orientation as it may keep

              the individual choice at bay. At the core of the concept of

              identity lies self-determination, realization of one‘s own

              abilities visualizing the opportunities and rejection of external

              views with a clear conscience that is in accord with

              constitutional norms and values or principles that are, to put

              in a capsule, ―constitutionally permissible‖.

(ii)     InSuresh Koushal(supra), this Court overturned the

              decision of the Delhi High Court inNaz Foundation(supra)157thereby upholding the constitutionality ofSection 377IPC

        and stating a ground that the LGBT community comprised

        only a minuscule fraction of the total population and that the

        mere fact that the said Section was being misused is not a

        reflection of the vires of the Section. Such a view is

        constitutionally impermissible.

(iii)   Our Constitution is a living and organic document capable of

        expansion with the changing needs and demands of the

        society. The Courts must commemorate that it is the

        Constitution and its golden principles to which they bear their

        foremost allegiance and they must robe themselves with the

        armoury of progressive and pragmatic interpretation to

        combat the evils of inequality and injustice that try to creep

        into the society. The role of the Courts gains more

        importance when the rights which are affected belong to a

        class of persons or a minority group who have been

        deprived of even their basic rights since time immemorial.

(iv)    The primary objective of having a constitutional democracy

        is to transform the society progressively and inclusively. Our

        Constitution has been perceived to be transformative in the158sense that the interpretation of its provisions should not be

      limited to the mere literal meaning of its words; instead they

      ought to be given a meaningful construction which is

      reflective of their intent and purpose in consonance with the

      changing times. Transformative constitutionalism not only

      includes within its wide periphery the recognition of the rights

      and dignity of individuals but also propagates the fostering

      and development of an atmosphere wherein every individual

      is bestowed with adequate opportunities to develop socially,

      economically and politically. Discrimination of any kind

      strikes at the very core of any democratic society. When

      guided by transformative constitutionalism, the society is

      dissuaded from indulging in any form of discrimination so

      that the nation is guided towards a resplendent future.

(v)   Constitutional morality embraces within its sphere several

      virtues, foremost of them being the espousal of a pluralistic

      and inclusive society. The concept of constitutional morality

      urges the organs of the State, including the Judiciary, to

      preserve the heterogeneous nature of the society and to

      curb any attempt by the majority to usurp the rights and159freedoms of a smaller or minuscule section of the populace.

       Constitutional morality cannot be martyred at the altar of

       social morality and it is only constitutional morality that can

       be allowed to permeate into the Rule of Law. The veil of

       social morality cannot be used to violate fundamental rights

       of   even   a   single   individual,   for   the   foundation   of

       constitutional morality rests upon the recognition of diversity

       that pervades the society.

(vi)   The right to live with dignity has been recognized as a

       human right on the international front and by number of

       precedents of this Court and, therefore, the constitutional

       courts must strive to protect the dignity of every individual,

       for without the right to dignity, every other right would be

       rendered meaningless. Dignity is an inseparable facet of

       every individual that invites reciprocative respect from others

       to every aspect of an individual which he/she perceives as

       an essential attribute of his/her individuality, be it an

       orientation or an optional expression of choice. The

       Constitution has ladened the judiciary with the very important

       duty to protect and ensure the right of every individual160including the right to express and choose without any

     impediments so as to enable an individual to fully realize

     his/her fundamental right to live with dignity.

(vii) Sexual orientation is one of the many biological phenomena

     which is natural and inherent in an individual and is

     controlled by neurological and biological factors. The science

     of sexuality has theorized that an individual exerts little or no

     control over who he/she gets attracted to. Any discrimination

     on the basis of one‘s sexual orientation would entail a

     violation of the fundamental right of freedom of expression.

(viii) After the privacy judgment inPuttaswamy(supra), the right

     to privacy has been raised to the pedestal of a fundamental

     right.The reasoning inSuresh Koushal(supra), that only a

     minuscule fraction of the total population comprises of LGBT

     community and that the existence ofSection 377IPC

     abridges the fundamental rights of a very minuscule

     percentage of the total populace, is found to be a discordant

     note.The said reasoning inSuresh Koushal(supra), in our

     opinion, is fallacious, for the framers of our Constitution

     could have never intended that the fundamental rights shall161be extended for the benefit of the majority only and that the

       Courts ought to interfere only when the fundamental rights of

       a large percentage of the total populace is affected. In fact,

       the said view would be completely against the constitutional

       ethos, for the language employed in Part III of the

       Constitution as well as the intention of the framers of our

       Constitution mandates that the Courts must step in

       whenever there is a violation of the fundamental rights, even

       if the right/s of a single individual is/are in peril.

(ix)   There is a manifest ascendance of rights under the

       Constitution which paves the way for the doctrine of

       progressive realization of rights as such rights evolve with

       the evolution of the society. This doctrine, as a natural

       corollary, gives birth to the doctrine of non-retrogression, as

       per which there must not be atavism of constitutional rights.In the light of the same, if we were to accept the view inSuresh Koushal(supra), it would tantamount to a

       retrograde    step    in   the    direction   of   the   progressive

       interpretation of the Constitution and denial of progressive

       realization of rights.

(x)    Autonomy is individualistic. Under the autonomy principle,

       the individual has sovereignty over his/her body. He/she can

       surrender his/her autonomy wilfully to another individual and

       their intimacy in privacy is a matter of their choice. Such

       concept of identity is not only sacred but is also in

       recognition of the quintessential facet of humanity in a

       person‘s nature. The autonomy establishes identity and the

       said identity, in the ultimate eventuate, becomes a part of

       dignity in an individual.

(xi)   A cursory reading of bothSections 375IPC and 377IPCreveals that although the former Section gives due

       recognition to the absence of ‗wilful and informed consent‘

       for an act to be termed as rape, per contra, Section 377

       does not contain any such qualification embodying in itself

       the absence of ‗wilful and informed consent‘ to criminalize

       carnal    intercourse       which   consequently   results   in

       criminalizing even voluntary carnal intercourse between

       homosexuals, heterosexuals, bisexuals and transgenders.Section 375IPC, after the coming into force of theCriminal

       Law (Amendment) Act, 2013, has not used the words163‗subject to any other provision of theIPC‘. This indicates thatSection 375IPC is not subject toSection 377IPC.

(xii) The expression ‗against the order of nature‘ has neither

     been defined inSection 377IPC nor in any other provision of

     theIPC. The connotation given to the expression by various

     judicial pronouncements includes all sexual acts which are

     not intended for the purpose of procreation. Therefore, if

     coitus is not performed for procreation only, it does not per

     se make it ‗against the order of nature‘.

(xiii)Section 377IPC, in its present form, being violative of the

     right to dignity and the right to privacy, has to be tested, both,

     on the pedestal ofArticles 14and19of the Constitution as

     per the lawlaid down inManeka Gandhi(supra) and other

     later authorities.

(xiv) An examination ofSection 377IPC on the anvil ofArticle 14of the Constitution reveals that the classification adopted

     under the said Section has no reasonable nexus with its

     object as other penal provisions such as Section 375 IPC

     and the POCSO Act already penalize non-consensual carnal

     intercourse. Per contra,Section 377IPC in its present form164has resulted in an unwanted collateral effect whereby even

     ‗consensual sexual acts‘, which are neither harmful to

     children nor women, by the LGBTs have been woefully

     targeted thereby resulting in discrimination and unequal

     treatment to the LGBT community and is, thus, violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution.

(xv)Section 377IPC, so far as it criminalises even consensual

     sexual acts between competent adults, fails to make a

     distinction between non-consensual and consensual sexual

     acts of competent adults in private space which are neither

     harmful nor contagious to the society.Section 377IPC

     subjects the LGBT community to societal pariah and

     dereliction and is, therefore, manifestly arbitrary, for it has

     become an odious weapon for the harassment of the LGBT

     community by subjecting them to discrimination and unequal

     treatment.      Therefore, in view of the lawlaid down inShayara Bano(supra),Section 377IPC is liable to be

     partially struck down for being violative ofArticle 14of the

     Constitution.

(xvi) An examination ofSection 377IPC on the anvil ofArticle

      19(1)(a)reveals that it amounts to an unreasonable

      restriction, for public decency and morality cannot be

      amplified beyond a rational or logical limit and cannot be

      accepted as reasonable grounds for curbing the fundamental

      rights of freedom of expression and choice of the LGBT

      community. Consensual carnal intercourse among adults, be

      it homosexual or heterosexual, in private space, does not in

      any way harm the public decency or morality. Therefore,Section 377IPC in its present form violatesArticle 19(1)(a)of the Constitution.

(xvii) Ergo,Section 377IPC, so far as it penalizes any consensual

      sexual relationship between two adults, be it homosexuals

      (man and a man), heterosexuals (man and a woman) or

      lesbians (woman and a woman), cannot be regarded as

      constitutional. However, if anyone, by which we mean both

      a man and a woman, engages in any kind of sexual activity

      with an animal, the said aspect of Section 377 is

      constitutional and it shall remain a penal offence underSection 377IPC. Any act of the description covered under166Section 377IPC done between two individuals without the

        consent of any one of them would invite penal liability underSection 377IPC.

(xviii) The decision inSuresh Koushal(supra), not being in

        consonance with what we have stated hereinabove, is

        overruled.

254. The Writ Petitions are, accordingly, disposed of. There shall be

no order as to costs.

……………………………….CJI
                                  (Dipak Misra)


                                  …………………………….…..J.
                                  (A.M. Khanwilkar)
New Delhi;

September 6, 2018
                                       REPORTABLE


          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

       CRIMINAL/CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

      WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 76 OF 2016


NAVTEJ SINGH JOHAR & ORS.         …PETITIONERS

VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA                    …RESPONDENT

                        WITH
         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.572 OF 2016
                        WITH
      WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.88 OF 2018
                        WITH
      WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.100 OF 2018
                        WITH
      WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.101 OF 2018
                        WITH
      WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.121 OF 20181JUDGMENT

       R.F. Nariman, J.

1.      “The love that dare not speak its name” is how the love

       that exists between same-sex couples was described by Lord

       Alfred Douglas, the lover of Oscar Wilde, in his poem Two

       Loves published in 1894 in Victorian England.

2.      The word “homosexual” is not derived from “homo”

       meaning man, but from “homo” meaning same.1 The word

       “lesbian” is derived from the name of the Greek island of

       Lesbos, where it was rumored that female same-sex couples

       proliferated. What we have before us is a relook at the

       constitutional validity ofSection 377of the Indian Penal Code

       which was enacted in the year 1860 (over 150 years ago)

       insofar as it criminalises consensual sex between adult same-

       sex couples.

3.      These cases have had a chequered history. Writ petitions

       were filed before the Delhi High Court challenging the


1 Homo in Greek means ‘same’ – the Nicene creed that was accepted by the Catholic Church after the
Council at Nicaea, held by Emperor Constantine in 325 AD, was formulated with the word ‘homo’ at the
forefront. When coupled with ‘sios’ it means same substance, meaning thereby that Jesus Christ was
divine as he was of the same substance as God.

constitutional validity of Section 377 of the Penal Code insofar

as it criminalizes consensual sex between adult same-sex

couples within the confines of their homes or other private

places.   A Division Bench of the Delhi High Court inNaz

Foundation     v.   Government        of   NCT   of   Delhi   (“Naz

Foundation”), 111 DRJ 1 (2009), after considering wide-

ranging arguments on both sides, finally upheld the plea of the

petitioners in the following words:

Union of India (“NALSA”), (2014) 5 SCC 438, which

construedArticles 15and21of the Constitution of India as

including the right to gender identity and sexual orientation, and

held that just like men and women, transgenders could enjoy all

the fundamental rights that other citizens of India could enjoy.

Thereafter, in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) andAnr. v.

Union of India and Ors. (“Puttaswamy”), (2017) 10 SCC 1, a

nine-Judge Bench of this Court unanimously declared that there

is a fundamental right of privacy which enured in favour of all

persons, the concomitant of which was that the right to make

choices that were fundamental to a person’s way of living could

not be interfered with by the State without compelling necessity

and/or harm caused to other individuals.

4

6.    The impetus of this decision is what led to a three-Judge

Bench order of 08.01.2018, which referred to the judgment ofPuttaswamy(supra) and other arguments made by Shri Datar,

to refer the correctness of Suresh Kumar Koushal’s case

(supra) to a larger Bench.This is how the matter has come to

us.

History of Section 377

7.    In the western world, given the fact that both Judaism and

Christianity outlawed sexual intercourse by same-sex couples,

offences relating thereto were decided by ecclesiastical courts.

It is only as a result of Henry VIII of England breaking with the

Roman Catholic Church that legislation in his reign, namely the

Buggery   Act   of   1533,   prohibited   “the   detestable   and

abominable offence” of buggery committed with mankind or

beast.

8.    Between 1806, when reliable figures begin, and 1900,

8,921 men were indicted for sodomy, gross indecency or other

‘unnatural misdemeanours’ in England and Wales. Ninety men

per year were, on average, indicted for homosexual offences in5this period. About a third as many were arrested and their case

       considered by magistrates. Most of the men convicted were

       imprisoned, but between 1806 and 1861, when the death

       penalty for sodomy was finally abolished, 404 men were

       sentenced to death. Fifty-six were executed, and the remainder

       were either imprisoned or transported to Australia for life. Two

       such men, James Pratt and John Smith, were the last to be

       executed in Britain for sodomy on 27 November, 1835.

9.      During the reign of the East India Company in India,

       Parliament established what was called the Indian Law

       Commission. In 1833, Thomas Babington Macaulay was

       appointed to chair the Commission.2

10.     The Indian Law Commission, with Macaulay as its head,

       submitted the Draft Penal Code to the Government of India on

       14.10.1837. This draft consisted of 488 clauses. After the First

       Report submitted on 23.07.1846, the Second Report of Her

       Majesty’s Commissioners for revising and consolidating the law

       was submitted by C.H. Cameron and D. Eliott on 24.06.1847.
2Thomas Babington Macaulay was a Whig liberal who was a precocious genius. Apart from having a
photographic memory with which he astounded persons around him, one incident which took place when
Macaulay was only 5 years old told the world what was in store for it when Macaulay would reach
adulthood. A lady dropped some hot coffee on the five-year old child and expressed great sorrow for
doing so. The child riposted, after letting out a scream, “Madam, the agony has abated”.6These Commissioners concluded that the Draft Penal Code

was sufficiently complete, and, with slight modifications, fit to be

acted upon. The revised edition of the Penal Code was then

forwarded to the Judges of the Supreme Court at Calcutta on

30.05.1851, and also to the Judges of the Sudder Court at

Calcutta.

11.   The revised edition of the Penal Code as prepared by Mr.

Bethune, the Legislative member of the Legislative Council of

India, together with the views of the Chief Justice and Mr.

Justice Buller of the Supreme Court at Calcutta, as well as

those of Mr. Justice Colvile were sent to the Company in

London. The Court of Directors in London were anxious to see

the Penal Code enacted as early as possible. They, therefore,

constituted a Council in which Sir Barnes Peacock was made

the fourth member.

12.   This Council or Committee prepared a revised Penal

Code which was then referred to a Select Committee in 1857.

Given the Indian Mutiny of 1857, the Code was passed soon

thereafter in October, 1860 and brought into force on

01.01.1862. Sir James Fitzjames Stephen proclaimed that:7

Macaulay’s original draft read:-

Even in this most prudish of all periods of English history, Lord10Macaulay recognized a lesser sentence for the crime of

“unnatural lust”, if performed with consent. Living in the era in

which he lived, he clearly eschewed public discussion on this

subject, stating:-

Law in the United Kingdom

21.   As has been mentioned earlier in this judgment, the first

enactment prohibiting same-sex intercourse was passed in the

year 1533 in the reign of Henry VIII. The death penalty was

prescribed even for consenting adults who indulged in this

“abomination”.   The trial of persons such as Oscar Wilde is

what led to law reform in the U.K., albeit 60 years later.

22.   The Marquess of Queensberry’s son, Lord Alfred

Douglas, was having an affair with Oscar Wilde, which the

Marquess discovered. At Oscar Wilde’s club, the Marquess left

a note describing Oscar Wilde as a “somdomite” which led to

one of the most celebrated defamation actions in England. In

the course of his cross-examination of Oscar Wilde, Sir Edward

Carson was able to draw from his famous witness the fact that12boys could be plain or ugly, which would have led to the truth of

       establishing the charge against Oscar Wilde. Rather than go on

       with the trial, Oscar Wilde hastily withdrew his action for

       defamation. But that was not the end. A prosecution under theCriminal Law Amendment Actof 1885 followed, in which Oscar

       Wilde was convicted and sent to jail for a period of two years.

       He never quite recovered, for after his jail sentence was served

       out, he died a broken and impoverished man in Paris at the

       early age of 46.3

23.     The winds of change slowly blew over the British Isles

       and finally, post the Second World War, what is known as the

       Wolfenden Committee was appointed on 24.08.1954, inter alia

       to consider the law and practice relating to homosexual

       offences and the treatment of persons convicted of such

       offences by the courts. The Committee Report, even though it

       is of a vintage of September 1957, makes interesting reading.

       In paragraphs 31 and 32 of the Report, the Committee opined:-

“31. Even if it could be established that
homosexuality were a disease, it is clear that many
individuals, however their state is reached, present
social rather than medical problems and must be
dealt with by social, including penological, methods.
This is especially relevant when the claim that
homosexuality is an illness is taken to imply that its
treatment should be a medical responsibility. Much
more important than the academic question whether
homosexuality is a disease is the practical question
whether a doctor should carry out any part or all of
the treatment. Psychiatrists deal regularly with
problems of personality which are not regarded as
diseases, and conversely the treatment of cases of
recognized psychiatric illness may not be strictly
medical but may best be carried out by non-medical
supervision or environmental change. Examples
would be certain cases of senile dementia or
chronic schizophrenia which can best be managed
at home. In fact, the treatment of behavior
disorders, even when medically supervised, is rarely
confined to psychotherapy or to treatment of a
strictly medical kind. This is not to deny that expert
advice should be sought in very many homosexual
cases. We shall have something more to say on
these matters in connection with the treatment of
offenders.

32. The claim that homosexuality is an illness
carries the further implication that the sufferer
cannot help it and therefore carries a diminished
responsibility for his actions. Even if it were
accepted that homosexuality could properly be
described as a “disease”, we should not accept this
corollary. There are no prima facie grounds for
supposing that because a particular person’s sexual
propensity happens to lie in the direction of persons
of his or her own sex it is any less controllable than
that of those whose propensity is for persons of the
opposite sex. We are informed that patients in
mental hospitals, with few exceptions, show clearly14by their behavior that they can and do exercise a
      high degree of responsibility and self-control; for
      example, only a small minority need to be kept in
      locked wards. The existence of varying degrees of
      self-control is a matter of daily experience - the
      extent to which coughing can be controlled is an
      example - and the capacity for self-control can vary
      with the personality structure or with temporary
      physical or emotional conditions. The question
      which is important for us here is whether the
      individual suffers from a condition which causes
      diminished responsibility. This is a different question
      from the question whether he was responsible in the
      past for the causes or origins of his present
      condition. That is an interesting enquiry and may be
      of relevance in other connections; but our concern is
      with the behavior which flows from the individual’s
      present condition and with the extent to which he is
      responsible for that behavior, whatever may have
      been the causes of the condition from which it
      springs. Just as expert opinion can give valuable
      assistance in deciding on the appropriate ways of
      dealing with a convicted person, so can it help in
      assessing the additional factors that may affect his
      present responsibility?”

24.   It then went on to note in paragraph 36 that the evidence

before them showed that homosexuality existed in all levels of

society and was prevalent in all trades and professions. In

paragraph 53, the main arguments for retention of the existing

law were set out. Insofar as societal health was concerned, the

Committee rejected this for lack of evidence.       It went on to

state:-

15

25.   Insofar as the damaging effects on family life were

concerned, this was rejected by stating:-

26.   And in rejecting the allegation that men indulging in such

practices with other men may turn their attention to boys, the

Committee said:-

27. Finally, the Committee stated:

arguments we have already advanced. There
remains one additional counter-argument which we
believe to be decisive, namely, the importance
which society and the law ought to give to individual
freedom of choice and action in matters of private
morality. Unless a deliberate attempt is to be made
by society, acting through the agency of the law, to
equate the sphere of crime with that of sin, there
must remain a realm of private morality and
immorality which is, in brief and crude terms, not the
law’s business. To say this is not to condone or
encourage private immorality. On the contrary, to
emphasise the personal and private responsibility of
the individual for his own actions, and that is a
responsibility which a mature agent can properly be
expected to carry for himself without the threat of
punishment from the law.

62. We accordingly recommend that homosexual
behaviour between consenting adults in private
should no longer be a criminal offence.”19

28.     Change came slowly. It was only in 1967 that the

       Wolfenden Committee Report was acted upon by the British

       Parliament by enacting the Sexual Offences Act, 1967, which

       abolished penal offences involving consenting same-sex adults.

29.     In 2017, the United Kingdom passed the Policing and

       Crimes Act which served as an amnesty law to pardon persons

       who were cautioned or convicted under legislations that

       outlawed homosexual acts.4


       The Law in the United States

30.     At the time that the United States achieved independence

       in 1776, the law in all the States insofar as same-sex offences

       were concerned, was the English law.                       This state of affairs

       continued until challenges were made in the last century to

       state statutes which criminalized sodomy. One such case,

       namely, Bowers v. Hardwick (“Bowers”), 92 L. Ed. 2d 140

       (1986), reached the United States Supreme Court in the year

       1986.      By a 5:4 decision, the United States Supreme Court

       upheld a Georgia statute criminalizing sodomy and its
4 The impetus for this law was the prosecution of Alan Turing in 1952. Alan Turing was instrumental in
cracking intercepted code messages that enabled the Allies to defeat Germany in many crucial
engagements in the War. Turing accepted chemical castration treatment as an alternative to prison upon
conviction, but committed suicide just before his 42nd birthday in 1954.20applicability to the commission of that act with another adult

male in the bedroom of the respondent’s home. Justice White,

who spoke for the majority of the Court, did this on several

grounds.

31.   First and foremost, he stated that there was no right to

privacy that extended to homosexual sodomy. No connection

between family, marriage, or procreation and homosexuality

had been demonstrated to the court. The next ground for

upholding such law was that proscriptions against such conduct

had ancient roots. Stanley v. Georgia (“Stanley”), 22 L. Ed.

2d 542 (1969), where the Court held that the First Amendment

prohibits conviction for possessing and reading obscene

material in the privacy of one’s home, was brushed aside

stating that Stanley itself recognized that its holding offered no

protection for possession of drugs, firearms or stolen goods in

the home. Therefore, such a claimed fundamental right could

not possibly exist when adultery, incest and other sexual crimes

are punished, even though they may be committed in the home.

Another important rationale was that the Georgia law was

based on a notion of morality, which is a choice that could21legitimately be exercised by a State Legislature. Chief Justice

Burger, concurring, again relied heavily on ‘ancient roots’,

stating that throughout the history of western civilization,

homosexual sodomy was outlawed in the Judeo-Christian

tradition, which the Georgia legislature could well follow.

Justice Powell, concurring with the majority, found that to

imprison a person upto 20 years for a single, private,

consensual act of sodomy within the home would be a cruel

and unusual punishment within the meaning of the Eighth

Amendment. However, since no trial had taken place on the

facts, and since the respondent did not raise any such Eighth

Amendment issue, Justice Powell concurred with the majority.

32.   The dissenting opinion of four Justices makes interesting

reading. Justice Blackmun, who spoke for four dissenters,

began with the classical definition of the old privacy right which

is the “right to be let alone”, and quoted from Justice Holmes’

article The Path of the Law, stating:-

33.   So much, then, for history and its “ancient roots”. Justice

Blackmun’s dissent then went on to consider the famous

judgment in Wisconsin v. Yoder, 32 L. Ed. 2d 15 (1972), in

which the Court had upheld the fundamental right of the Amish

community not to send their children to schools, stating that a

way of life that is odd or even erratic but interferes with no

rights or interests of others is not to be condemned because it

is different. Referring to Judeo-Christian values, the Court said

that the fact that certain religious groups condemn the behavior

of sodomy gives the State no licence to impose their moral

judgment on the entire citizenry of the United States. Ending

with a John Stuart Mill type of analysis, the dissent stated:-

34.   Justice Stevens, also in a powerfully worded dissent,

specifically stated that the protection of privacy extends to

intimate choices made by unmarried as well as married

persons.

35.   It took the United States 17 years to set aside this view of

the law and to accept the dissenting judgments in Bowers

(supra).

36.   In Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003), by a

majority of 6:3, Justice Anthony Kennedy, speaking for the

majority, set aside the judgment in Bowers (supra), accepting

that the dissenting judgments in that case were correct. In a tilt

at the history analysis of the majority judgment in Bowers

(supra), the Court found that earlier sodomy laws were not

directed at homosexuals at large, but instead sought to prohibit

non-procreative sexual activity more generally, and were not

enforced against consenting adults acting in private. After citing

from Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey

(“Casey”), 505 U.S. 833 (1992), the majority held – “our

obligation is to define the liberty of all, not to mandate our own

moral code.” The majority judgment then referred to a Model24Penal Code that the American Law Institute took out in 1955,

       making it clear that it did not provide for criminal penalties for

       consensual same-sex relationships conducted in private. The

       judgment then went on to refer to the Wolfenden Committee

       Report and the Sexual Offences Act,1967 in the United

       Kingdom and referred to the European Court’s decision in

       Dudgeon v. United Kingdom, 45 Eur. Ct. H. R. (1981). It then

       referred to Romer v. Evans (“Romer”), 517 U.S. 620 (1996),

       where the Court struck down a class-based legislation which

       deprived homosexuals of State anti-discrimination laws as a

       violation of the Equal Protection Clause. The majority then

       found that the 1986 decision of Bowers (supra), had “sustained

       serious erosion” through their recent decisions in Casey (supra)

       and Romer (supra), and had, therefore, to be revisited.5 Justice



5The majority’s decision echoes what had happened earlier in what is referred to as the celebrated flag
salute case, namely, West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624 (1943). The
U.S. Supreme Court had overruled its recent judgment in Minersville School District v. Gobitis, 310
U.S. 586 (1940). Justice Jackson speaking for the majority of the Court found:-

37.   Before coming to our own judgments, we may quickly

survey some of the judgments of the courts of other democratic

nations. The European Community decisions, beginning with

Dudgeon v. United Kingdom (supra) and continuing with

Norris v. Ireland, Application no. 10581/83, and Modinos v.

Cyprus, 16 EHRR 485 (1993), have all found provisions similar

to Section 377 to     be violative ofArticle 8of the European

Human Rights Convention, 1948 in which everyone has the

right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his

correspondence, and no interference can be made with these

rights unless the law is necessary in a democratic society inter

alia for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of

health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and

freedoms of others.

38.   In El-Al Israel Airlines Ltd. v. Jonathan Danielwitz,

H.C.J. 721/94, the Supreme Court of Israel, speaking through27Barak, J., recognized a same-sex relationship so that a male

companion could be treated as being a companion for the

receipt of a free or discounted aeroplane ticket. The Court

held:-

Thus, for example, we consider discrimination on
the basis of race, religion, nationality, language,
ethnic group and age to be particularly serious. In29this framework, the Israeli legal system attaches
        great importance to the need to guarantee equality
        between the sexes and to prevent discrimination on
        the basis of sex (see HCJ 153/87 Shakdiel v.

Minister of Religious Affairs [19]; Poraz v. Mayor of
        Tel Aviv-Jaffa [6]).”

                                          (Emphasis supplied)

39.     An instructive recent judgment from Trinidad and Tobago

in Jason Jones v. Attorney General of Trinidad and Tobago,

Claim     No.   CV    2017-00720,      followed   our   judgment    inPuttaswamy(supra) in order to strike down Section 13 of the

Sexual Offences Act, 1986 on the ground that the State cannot

criminalise sexual relations of the same sex between

consenting adults. The court concluded:-

do not counterbalance the claimant’s limit of his
        fundamental right of which he has given evidence.30Instead, the court accepts the claimant’s position
      that the law as it stands is not sufficiently important
      to justify limiting his fundamental rights and that he
      has proven it on a balance of probabilities.”

40.   To similar effect is the judgment of the High Court of Fiji in

Dhirendra Nadan v. State, Case No. HAA0085 of 2005, where

a Section similar to Section 377 was held to be inconsistent

with the constitutional right of privacy and invalid to the extent

that the law criminalises acts constituting private consensual

sexual conduct “against the course of nature” between adults.

41.   The South African Supreme Court, by a decision of 1999

in The National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality v.

The Minister of Home Affairs, Case CCT 10/99, after referring

to various judgments of other courts, also found a similar

section to be inconsistent with the fundamental rights under its

Constitution.

42.   Another important decision is that of the United Nations

Human     Rights    Committee      in   Toonen     v.     Australia,

Communication          No.        488/1992,        U.N.         Doc

CCPR/C/50/D/488/1992         (1994),    dated   31.03.1994.     The

Committee was called upon to determine whether Mr. Nicholas31Toonen, who resided in the state of Tasmania, had been the

victim of arbitrary interference with his privacy, and whether he

had been discriminated against on the basis of his sexual

orientation of being a homosexual. The Committee found:-

Secondly, the Committee notes that no link has
been shown between the continued criminalization
of homosexual activity and the effective control of
the spread of the HIV/AIDS virus.

XXX
8.7 The State party has sought the Committee's
guidance as to whether sexual orientation may be
considered an “other status” for the purposes ofarticle 26.The same issue could arise underarticle
2, paragraph 1, of the Covenant. The Committee
confines itself to noting, however, that in its view the
reference to "sex" inarticles 2, paragraph 1, and 26
is to be taken as including sexual orientation.
XXX

10. Underarticle 2(3)(a)of the Covenant, the
author, victim of a violation ofarticles 17, paragraph
1, juncto 2, paragraph 1, of the Covenant, is entitled
to a remedy. In the opinion of the Committee, an33effective remedy would be the repeal of Sections
      122(a), (c) and 123 of the Tasmanian Criminal
      Code.”

43.   As a result of these findings, the Australian Parliament, on

19.12.1994, passed the Human Rights (Sexual Conduct) Act,

1994,Section 4of which reads as under:-

constitution enactment, namely,Section 30of the Punjab

Excise Act of 1914, which prohibited employment of any

woman in any part of premises in which liquor is consumed by

the public. Sinha, J. adverted to the fact that when the original34Act was enacted, the concept of equality between the two

sexes was unknown. The Constitution changed all that when it

enactedArticles 14and15.What is of importance is that when

discrimination is made between two sets of persons, the

classification must be founded on some rational criteria having

regard to the societal conditions as they exist presently, and not

as they existed in the early 20th century or even earlier. This

was felicitously stated by the learned Judge as follows:-

The criteria which in absence of any constitutional
provision and, it will bear repetition to state, having
regard to the societal conditions as they prevailed in
early 20th century, may not be a rational criteria in
the 21st century. In the early 20th century, the
hospitality sector was not open to women in
general. In the last 60 years, women in India have
gained entry in all spheres of public life. They have
also been representing people at grass root
democracy. They are now employed as drivers of
heavy transport vehicles, conductors of service
carriages, pilots, et. al. Women can be seen to be
occupying Class IV posts to the post of a Chief
Executive Officer of a Multinational Company. They36are now widely accepted both in police as also army
      services.”

45.   The Court went on to hold that “proportionality” should be

a standard capable of being called reasonable in a modern

democratic society (See paragraph 36).

In a significant paragraph, the learned Judge held:-

46.   The learned Judge then went on to further hold that the

standard of judicial scrutiny of legislations, which on their face

effect discrimination, is as follows:-

47. No law in its ultimate effect should end up
      perpetuating the oppression of women. Personal
      freedom is a fundamental tenet which cannot be
      compromised in the name of expediency until and
      unless there is a compelling State purpose.

Heightened level of scrutiny is the normative
      threshold for judicial review in such cases.”

47.   Finally, the Court held:-

51. The Court’s task is to determine whether the
      measures furthered by the State in the form of
      legislative mandate, to augment the legitimate aim
      of protecting the interests of women are
      proportionate to the other bulk of well-settled gender
      norms such as autonomy, equality of opportunity,
      right to privacy, et al. The bottomline in this behalf
      would be a functioning modern democratic society
      which ensures freedom to pursue varied
      opportunities and options without discriminating on
      the basis of sex, race, caste or any other like basis.38In fine, there should be a reasonable relationship of
      proportionality between the means used and the
      aim pursued.”

48.   The Section which had been struck down by the High

Court was held to be arbitrary and unreasonable by this Court

as well.

49.   Close on the heels of this Court’s judgment inSuresh

Kumar Koushal(supra) is this Court’s judgment in NALSA

(supra). In this case, the Court had to grapple with the trauma,

agony and pain of the members of the transgender community.

The Court referred to Section 377 in the following words:

50.   The Court went on to explain the concepts of gender

identity and sexual orientation, and relied heavily upon

Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International

Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation and

Gender Identity. The Court then went on to hold:

51.   Insofar asArticles 15and16of the Constitution were

concerned, the Court held:

52.   Insofar asArticle 19(1)(a)of the Constitution and

transgenders were concerned, the Court held:

53.   In a significant paragraph relating to the personal

autonomy of an individual, this Court held:

54.   The conclusion therefore was:-

55.   Dr. A.K. Sikri, J., in a separate concurring judgment,

spoke of the fundamental and universal principle of the right of

choice given to every individual, which is an inseparable part of

human rights. He then went on to hold:-

56.   And in paragraphs 125 and 129, he outlined the role of

our Court as follows:-

43

Such rights are to be guaranteed to each and every
      human being. These TGs, even though insignificant
      in numbers, are still human beings and therefore
      they have every right to enjoy their human rights.”

57.   In an unusual final order, the Court declared:-

58.Puttaswamy(supra) is the next important nail in the

coffin of section 377 insofar as it pertains to consensual sex

between same-sex adults.In this judgment, Chandrachud, J.

referred approvingly to the NALSA (supra) judgment in

paragraph 96 and went on to hold that privacy is intrinsic to

freedom and liberty.In referring toSuresh Kumar Koushal(supra), Chandrachud, J. referred to the judgment as “another

discordant note” which directly bears upon the evolution of

constitutional   jurisprudence   on   the   right   to   privacy.Chandrachud, J. went on to castigate the judgment inSuresh

Kumar Koushal(supra), and held:-

Naz Foundation, (2014) 1 SCC 1 : (2013) 4 SCC
(Cri) 1] that the High Court had erroneously relied
upon international precedents “in its anxiety to
protect the so-called rights of LGBT persons” is
similarly, in our view, unsustainable. The rights of
the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
population cannot be construed to be “so-called
rights”. The expression “so-called” seems to
suggest the exercise of a liberty in the garb of a
right which is illusory. This is an inappropriate
construction of the privacy-based claims of the
LGBT population. Their rights are not “so-called” but
are real rights founded on sound constitutional
doctrine. They inhere in the right to life. They dwell
in privacy and dignity. They constitute the essence
of liberty and freedom. Sexual orientation is an
essential component of identity. Equal protection
demands protection of the identity of every
individual without discrimination.

146. The decision inKoushal [Suresh Kumar
Koushal v. Naz Foundation, (2014) 1 SCC 1 :

The de minimis hypothesis is misplaced because
the invasion of a fundamental right is not rendered
tolerable when a few, as opposed to a large number
of persons, are subjected to hostile treatment. The
reason why such acts of hostile discrimination are
constitutionally impermissible is because of the
chilling effect which they have on the exercise of the
fundamental right in the first place. For instance,
pre-publication restraints such as censorship are
vulnerable because they discourage people from
exercising their right to free speech because of the
fear of a restraint coming into operation. The chilling
effect on the exercise of the right poses a grave
danger to the unhindered fulfilment of one's sexual
orientation, as an element of privacy and dignity.
The chilling effect is due to the danger of a human
being subjected to social opprobrium or disapproval,
as reflected in the punishment of crime.Hence the
Koushal [Suresh Kumar Koushal v. Naz Foundation,
(2014) 1 SCC 1 : (2013) 4 SCC (Cri) 1] rationale
that prosecution of a few is not an index of violation
is flawed and cannot be accepted.Consequently,
we disagree with the manner in whichKoushal
[Suresh Kumar Koushal v. Naz Foundation, (2014)
1 SCC 1 : (2013) 4 SCC (Cri) 1] has dealt with the
privacy-dignity based claims of LGBT persons on
this aspect.

147. Since the challenge to Section 377 is pending
consideration before a larger Bench of this Court,
we would leave the constitutional validity to be
decided in an appropriate proceeding.”48

59.   In an important paragraph, the learned Judge finally held:

60.   Nariman, J., in his judgment, which was concurred in by

three other learned Judges, recognized the privacy of choice

which protects an individual’s autonomy over fundamental

personal choices as follows:-

61.   Kaul,   J.,   in   a   separate   judgment,    also   joined

Chandrachud, J. in castigating Suresh Kumar Koushal’s

judgment as follows:

One's sexual orientation is undoubtedly an attribute
of privacy. The observations made in Mosley v.

News Group Papers Ltd. [Mosley v. News Group
Papers Ltd., 2008 EWHC 1777 (QB)], in a broader
concept may be usefully referred to:

62.   Close upon the heels of these three judgments are three

other important recent decisions.InCommon Cause v. Union

of India, 2018 5 SCC 1, a case dealing with euthanasia, Dipak

Misra, C.J., states as under:-

52

determination and individual autonomy.

54

168. John Rawls says that the liberal concept of
autonomy focuses on choice and likewise, self-
determination is understood as exercised through
the process of choosing [Rawls, John, Political
Liberalism, 32, 33 (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1993)]. The respect for an individual human
being and in particular for his right to choose how he
should live his own life is individual autonomy or the
right of self-determination. It is the right against non-
interference by others, which gives a competent
person who has come of age the right to make
decisions concerning his or her own life and body
without any control or interference of others. Lord
Hoffman, in Reeves v. Commr. of Police of the
Metropolis [Reeves v. Commr. of Police of the
Metropolis, (2000) 1 AC 360 : (1993) 3 WLR 363
(HL)] has stated: (AC p. 369 B)
      “… Autonomy means that every individual
      is sovereign over himself and cannot be
      denied the right to certain kinds of
      behaviour, even if intended to cause his
      own death.”
XXX
202.8. An inquiry into Common Law jurisdictions
reveals that all adults with capacity to consent have
the right of self-determination and autonomy. The
said rights pave the way for the right to refuse
medical treatment which has acclaimed universal
recognition. A competent person who has come of
age has the right to refuse specific treatment or all
treatment or opt for an alternative treatment, even if
such decision entails a risk of death. The
“Emergency Principle” or the “Principle of Necessity”
has to be given effect to only when it is not
practicable to obtain the patient's consent for
treatment and his/her life is in danger. But where a
patient has already made a valid Advance Directive
which is free from reasonable doubt and specifying55that he/she does not wish to be treated, then such
      directive has to be given effect to.”

63.   In the same case, Chandrachud J. went on to hold:

The recognition afforded to the autonomy of the
      individual in matters relating to end-of-life decisions56is ultimately a step towards ensuring that life does
      not despair of dignity as it ebbs away.

XXX

441. The protective mantle of privacy covers certain
      decisions that fundamentally affect the human life
      cycle.       [Richard       Delgado,       “Euthanasia
      Reconsidered—The Choice of Death as an Aspect
      of the Right of Privacy”, Arizona Law Review (1975),
      Vol. 17, at p. 474.] It protects the most personal and
      intimate decisions of individuals that affect their life
      and development. [Ibid.] Thus, choices and
      decisions on matters such as procreation,
      contraception and marriage have been held to be
      protected. While death is an inevitable end in the
      trajectory of the cycle of human life of individuals
      are often faced with choices and decisions relating
      to death. Decisions relating to death, like those
      relating to birth, sex, and marriage, are protected by
      the Constitution by virtue of the right of privacy. The
      right to privacy resides in the right to liberty and in
      the respect of autonomy. [T.L. Beauchamp, “The
      Right to Privacy and the Right to Die”, Social
      Philosophy and Policy (2000), Vol. 17, at p. 276.]
      The right to privacy protects autonomy in making
      decisions related to the intimate domain of death as
      well as bodily integrity. Few moments could be of as
      much importance as the intimate and private
      decisions that we are faced regarding death. [Ibid.]
      Continuing treatment against the wishes of a patient
      is not only a violation of the principle of informed
      consent, but also of bodily privacy and bodily
      integrity that have been recognised as a facet of
      privacy by this Court.”

64.   Similarly, inShafin Jahan v. Asokan K.M., 2018 SCC

Online 343, this Court was concerned with the right of an adult57citizen to make her own marital choice. The learned Chief

Justice referred toArticles 19and21of the Constitution of India

as follows:-

Choosing a faith is the substratum of individuality
      and sans it, the right of choice becomes a shadow.
      It has to be remembered that the realization of a
      right is more important than the conferment of the
      right. Such actualization indeed ostracises any kind
      of societal notoriety and keeps at bay the patriarchal
      supremacy. It is so because the individualistic faith
      and expression of choice are fundamental for the
      fructification of the right. Thus, we would like to call
      it indispensable preliminary condition.”

65.In another recent judgment of a three-Judge Bench, inShakti Vahini v. Union of India, 2018 SCC Online SC 275,

which dealt with honour killings, this Court held:-

66.   Parliament is also alive to privacy interests and the fact

that persons of the same-sex who cohabit with each other are

entitled to equal treatment.

67.   A recent enactment, namely theMental Healthcare Act,

2017, throws a great deal of light on recent parliamentary

legislative understanding and acceptance of constitutional

values as reflected by this Court’s judgments.Section 2(s)of

the Act defines mental illness, which reads as under:

68.   This   definition   throws   to   the   winds   all   earlier

misconceptions of mental illness including the fact that same-

sex couples who indulge in anal sex are persons with mental

illness. At one point of time, the thinking in Victorian England

and early on in America was that homosexuality was to be

considered as a mental disorder. The amicus curiae brief of the

American Psychiatric Association in support of the petitioners in

Lawrence v. Texas (supra) has put paid to this notion. This

brief set out the research that has been done in this area as

follows:

In one of the first rigorous examinations of the
mental health status of homosexuality, Dr. Evelyn
Hooker administered a battery of standard
psychological tests to homosexual and heterosexual
men who were matched for age, IQ, and education.
See Evelyn Hooker, The Adjustment of the Male
Overt Homosexual, 21 J. Projective Techniques 17-
31 (1957). None of the men was in therapy at the
time of the study. Based on the ratings of expert
judges who were kept unaware of the men’s sexual
orientation, Hooker determined that homosexual
and heterosexual men could not be distinguished
from one another on the basis of the psychological
testing, and that a similar majority of the two groups
appeared to be free of psychopathology. She
concluded from her data that homosexuality is not
inherently associated with psychopathology and that
“homosexuality as a clinical entity does not exist.”
Id. at 18-19. Hooker’s findings were followed over
the next two decades by numerous studies, using a
variety of research techniques, which similarly
concluded that homosexuality is not related to
psychopathology or social maladjustment.

In 1973, in recognition that scientific data do not
indicate that a homosexual orientation is inherently
associated with psychopathology, amicus American
Psychiatric Association’s Board of Trustees voted to
remove homosexuality from the Psychiatric
Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. That resolution stated that
“homosexuality per se implies no impairment in63judgment, stability, reliability, or general social or
vocational capabilities.” Am. Psychiatric Ass’n,
Position Statement on Homosexuality and Civil
Rights (Dec. 15, 1973), printed in 131 Am. J.

Psychiatry 497 (1974). That decision was upheld by
a vote of the Psychiatric Association’s membership
the following year. After a thorough review of the
scientific evidence, amicus American Psychological
Association adopted the same position in 1975, and
urged all mental health professionals to help dispel
the stigma of mental illness that had long been
associated with homosexual orientation. See Am.
Psychol. Ass’n, Minutes of the Annual Meeting of
the Council of Representatives, 30 Am.

Psychologist 620, 633 (1975). Amicus National
Association of Social Workers (NASW) has adopted
a similar policy. See NASW, Policy Statement on
Lesbian and Gay Issues (Aug. 1993) (approved by
NASW Delegate Assembly), reprinted in NASW,
Social Work Speaks: NASW Policy Statements 162
(3d ed. 1994).

Of course, as is the case for heterosexuals, some
homosexuals have mental illnesses, psychological
disturbances, or poor social adjustment. Gay men,
lesbians, and bisexuals also may be at somewhat
greater risk for some kinds of psychological
problems because of stresses associated with the
experiences of social stigma and prejudice (see pp.
23-27, infra). But research conducted over four
decades has established that “homosexuality in and
of itself bears no necessary relationship to
psychological adjustment.” The efforts to “cure”
homosexuality that were prevalent in earlier
generations—which          included       hypnosis,
administration of hormones, aversive conditioning
with electric shock or nausea-inducing drugs,
lobotomy, electroshock, and castration—are now
regarded by the mental-health professions as
regrettable.”64

69.   It also outlined the prejudice, discrimination and violence

that has been encountered by gay people, as follows:

70.   Expressing its approval of the position taken by the

American Psychiatric Association, the Indian Psychiatric

Society in its recent Position Statement on Homosexuality

dated 02.07.2018 has stated:-

66

This is in line with the position of American
      Psychiatric Association and The International
      Classification of Diseases of the World health
      Organization which removed homosexuality from
      the list of psychiatric disorders in 1973 and 1992
      respectively.

The I.P.S recognizes same-sex sexuality as a
      normal variant of human sexuality much like
      heterosexuality and bisexuality. There is no
      scientific evidence that sexual orientation can be
      altered by any treatment and that any such attempts
      may in fact lead to low self-esteem and
      stigmatization of the person.

The Indian Psychiatric Society further supports de-
      criminalization of homosexual behavior.”

71.   The US Supreme Court, in its decision in Obergefell et

al. v. Hodges, Director, Ohio Department of Health, et al.,

576 US (2015), also took note of the enormous sufferings of

homosexual persons in the time gap between Bowers (supra)

and Lawrence v. Texas (supra), in the following words:-

Further, this is buttressed bySection 3of the Act which reads

as follows:-

UnderSection 3(3), mental illness shall not be determined on

the basis of social status or membership of a cultural group or

for any other reason not directly relevant to the mental health of69the person. More importantly, mental illness shall not be

determined on the basis of non-conformity with moral, social,

cultural, work or political values or religious beliefs prevailing in

a person’s community.       It is thus clear that Parliament has

unequivocally declared that the earlier stigma attached to

same-sex couples, as persons who are regarded as mentally ill,

has gone for good. This is another very important step forward

taken by the legislature itself which has undermined one of the

basic underpinnings of the judgment inSuresh Kumar

Koushal(supra).

Section 21(1)(a) is important and set out hereinbelow:

“115. Presumption of severe stress in case of
      attempt to commit suicide. (1) Notwithstanding
      anything contained insection 309of the Indian
      Penal Code any person who attempts to commit
      suicide shall be presumed, unless proved otherwise,
      to have severe stress and shall not be tried and
      punished under the said Code.

(2) The appropriate Government shall have a duty
      to provide care, treatment and rehabilitation to a
      person, having severe stress and who attempted to71commit suicide, to reduce the risk of recurrence of
      attempt to commit suicide.”

76.   Instead of the inhumane Section 309 which has remained

on the statute book for over 150 years, Section 115 makes it

clear that Section 309 is rendered largely ineffective, and on the

contrary, instead of committing a criminal offence, any person

who attempts to commit suicide shall be presumed to have

severe stress and shall not be tried and punished underSection

309of the Indian Penal Code.            More importantly, the

Government has an affirmative duty to provide care, treatment

and rehabilitation to such a person to reduce the risk of

recurrence of that person’s attempt to commit suicide. This

parliamentary declaration under Section 115 again is in keeping

with the present constitutional values, making it clear that

humane measures are to be taken by the Government in

respect of a person who attempts to commit suicide instead of

prosecuting him for the offence of attempt to commit suicide.

77.   And finally,Section 120of the Act reads as under:-

78.     The Latin maxim cessant ratione legis, cessat ipsa lex,

meaning when the reason for a law ceases, the law itself

ceases, is a rule of law which has been recognized by this

Court     in   H.H. Shri Swamiji       of Shri     Amar       Mutt    v.

Commissioner,         Hindu       Religious      and      Charitable

Endowments Dept, 1979 4 SCC 642 at paragraph 29, andState of Punjab v. Devans Modern Breweries Ltd., (2004) 11

SCC 26 at paragraph 335. It must not be forgotten that Section

377 was the product of the Victorian era, with its attendant

puritanical moral values. Victorian morality must give way to

constitutional morality as has been recognized in many of our

judgments.      Constitutional   morality   is   the   soul    of    the

Constitution, which is to be found in the Preamble of the

Constitution, which declares its ideals and aspirations, and is

also to be found in Part III of the Constitution, particularly with

respect to those provisions which assure the dignity of the

individual.    The rationale for Section 377, namely Victorian

morality, has long gone and there is no reason to continue with73

- as Justice Holmes said in the lines quoted above in this

judgment - a law merely for the sake of continuing with the law

when the rationale of such law has long since disappeared.

79.   Given our judgment inPuttaswamy(supra), in particular,

the right of every citizen of India to live with dignity and the right

to privacy including the right to make intimate choices regarding

the manner in which such individual wishes to live being

protected byArticles 14, 19and21, it is clear that Section 377,

insofar as it applies to same-sex consenting adults, demeans

them by having them prosecuted instead of understanding their

sexual orientation and attempting to correct centuries of the

stigma associated with such persons.

80.   The Union of India, seeing the writing on the wall, has

filed an affidavit in which it has not opposed the Petitioners but

left the matter to be considered by the wisdom of this Court.

Some of the intervenors have argued in favour of the retention

of Section 377 qua consenting adults on the grounds that

homosexual acts are not by themselves proscribed by Section

377. Unless there is penetration in the manner pointed out by

the explanation to the Section, no offence takes place. They74have also added that the Section needs to be retained given

the fact that it is only a parliamentary reflection of the prevailing

social mores of today in large segments of society. According to

them, this furthers a compelling state interest to reinforce

morals in public life which is not disproportionate in nature. We

are afraid that, given the march of events in constitutional law

by this Court, and parliamentary recognition of the plight of

such persons in certain provisions of theMental Healthcare Act,

2017, it will not be open for a constitutional court to substitute

societal morality with constitutional morality, as has been stated

by us hereinabove. Further, as stated inS. Khushboo v.

Kanniammal and Anr., (2010) 5 SCC 600, at paragraphs 46

and 50, this Court made it clear that notions of social morality

are inherently subjective and the criminal law cannot be used

as a means to unduly interfere with the domain of personal

autonomy. Morality and criminality are not co-extensive - sin is

not punishable on earth by Courts set up by the State but

elsewhere; crime alone is punishable on earth. To confuse the

one with the other is what causes the death knell of Section

377, insofar as it applies to consenting homosexual adults.75

81.     Another argument raised on behalf of the intervenors is

       that change in society, if any, can be reflected by amending

       laws by the elected representatives of the people. Thus, it

       would be open to the Parliament to carve out an exception from

       Section 377, but this Court should not indulge in taking upon

       itself the guardianship of changing societal mores. Such an

       argument must be emphatically rejected. The very purpose of

       the fundamental rights chapter in the Constitution of India is to

       withdraw the subject of liberty and dignity of the individual and

       place      such     subject      beyond       the     reach     of    majoritarian

       governments so that constitutional morality can be applied by

       this Court to give effect to the rights, among others, of ‘discrete

       and insular’ minorities.6 One such minority has knocked on the

       doors of this Court as this Court is the custodian of the

       fundamental rights of citizens. These fundamental rights do not

       depend upon the outcome of elections. And, it is not left to

       majoritarian governments to prescribe what shall be orthodox in

       matters concerning social morality. The fundamental rights

       chapter is like the north star in the universe of constitutionalism


6 This phrase occurs in one of the most celebrated footnotes in the US Supreme Court’s constitutional
history – namely, Footnote 4 of United States v. Carolene Products Co., 304 U.S. 144 (1938).76in India.7 Constitutional morality always trumps any imposition

          of a particular view of social morality by shifting and different

          majoritarian regimes.

82.Insofar asArticle 14is concerned, this Court inShayara

          Bano v. Union of India, (2017) 9 SCC 1, has stated, in

          paragraph 101, that a statutory provision can be struck down on

          the ground of manifest arbitrariness, when the provision is

          capricious, irrational and/or without adequate determining

          principle, as also if it is excessive or disproportionate. We find

          that Section 377, in penalizing consensual gay sex, is

          manifestly arbitrary. Given modern psychiatric studies and

          legislation which recognizes that gay persons and transgenders

          are not persons suffering from mental disorder and cannot

          therefore be penalized, the Section must be held to be a

          provision which is capricious and irrational. Also, roping in such

          persons with sentences going upto life imprisonment is clearly

          excessive and disproportionate, as a result of which, when

          applied to such persons,Articles 14and21of the Constitution
7   In William Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar (Act III, Scene 1), Caesar tells Cassius-

“I could be well moved, if I were as you;

If I could pray to move, prayers would move me:

States shall:

2.     The     rights    to    equality    and     non-

discrimination.—Everyone is entitled to enjoy all
human rights without discrimination on the basis of
sexual orientation or gender identity. Everyone is
entitled to equality before the law and the equal
protection of the law without any such discrimination
whether or not the enjoyment of another human
right is also affected. The law shall prohibit any such
discrimination and guarantee to all persons equal
and effective protection against any such
discrimination.

Discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or
gender identity includes any distinction, exclusion,
restriction or preference based on sexual orientation
or gender identity which has the purpose or effect of
nullifying or impairing equality before the law or the
equal protection of the law, or the recognition,
enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis, of all
human       rights    and    fundamental     freedoms.

Discrimination based on sexual orientation or
gender identity may be, and commonly is,
compounded by discrimination on other grounds
including gender, race, age, religion, disability,
health and economic status.

States shall:

discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and
gender identity in their national constitutions or other
appropriate legislation, if not yet incorporated
therein, including by means of amendment and81interpretation, and ensure the effective realisation of
these principles;

(b) repeal criminal and other legal provisions that
prohibit or are, in effect, employed to prohibit
consensual sexual activity among people of the
same-sex who are over the age of consent, and
ensure that an equal age of consent applies to both
same-sex and different-sex sexual activity;

(c) adopt appropriate legislative and other measures
to prohibit and eliminate discrimination in the public
and private spheres on the basis of sexual
orientation and gender identity;

(d) take appropriate measures to secure adequate
advancement of persons of diverse sexual
orientations and gender identities as may be
necessary to ensure such groups or individuals
equal enjoyment or exercise of human rights. Such
measures shall not be deemed to be discriminatory;

(e) in all their responses to discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation or gender identity, take
account of the manner in which such discrimination
may intersect with other forms of discrimination;

(f) take all appropriate action, including programmes
of education and training, with a view to achieving
the elimination of prejudicial or discriminatory
attitudes or behaviours which are related to the idea
of the inferiority or the superiority of any sexual
orientation or gender identity or gender expression.

3. The right to recognition before the law.—
Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as
a person before the law. Persons of diverse sexual
orientations and gender identities shall enjoy legal
capacity in all aspects of life. Each person's self-
defined sexual orientation and gender identity is
integral to their personality and is one of the most
basic aspects of self-determination, dignity and
freedom. No one shall be forced to undergo medical
procedures, including sex reassignment surgery,82sterilisation or hormonal therapy, as a requirement
for legal recognition of their gender identity. No
status, such as marriage or parenthood, may be
invoked as such to prevent the legal recognition of a
person's gender identity. No one shall be subjected
to pressure to conceal, suppress or deny their
sexual orientation or gender identity.

States shall:

XXX

4. The right to life.—Everyone has the right to life.
No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of life, including
by reference to considerations of sexual orientation
or gender identity. The death penalty shall not be
imposed on any person on the basis of consensual
sexual activity among persons who are over the age
of consent or on the basis of sexual orientation or
gender identity.

States shall:

XXX

6. The right to privacy.—Everyone, regardless of
sexual orientation or gender identity, is entitled to
the enjoyment of privacy without arbitrary or
unlawful interference, including with regard to their
family, home or correspondence as well as to
protection from unlawful attacks on their honour and84reputation. The right to privacy ordinarily includes
the choice to disclose or not to disclose information
relating to one's sexual orientation or gender
identity, as well as decisions and choices regarding
both one's own body and consensual sexual and
other relations with others.

States shall:

XXX

18. Protection from medical abuses.—No person
may be forced to undergo any form of medical or
psychological treatment, procedure, testing, or be
confined to a medical facility, based on sexual
orientation or gender identity. Notwithstanding any
classifications to the contrary, a person's sexual
orientation and gender identity are not, in and of
themselves, medical conditions and are not to be
treated, cured or suppressed.

States shall:

assistance nature, which may promote, facilitate or
in any other way render possible such abuses;

(f) ensure that any medical or psychological
treatment or counselling does not, explicitly or
implicitly, treat sexual orientation and gender
identity as medical conditions to be treated, cured or
suppressed.

19. The right to freedom of opinion and
expression.— Everyone has the right to freedom of
opinion and expression, regardless of sexual
orientation or gender identity. This includes the
expression of identity or personhood through
speech, deportment, dress, bodily characteristics,
choice of name, or any other means, as well as the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas of all kinds, including with regard to human
rights, sexual orientation and gender identity,
through any medium and regardless of frontiers.

States shall:

discriminatory in respect of issues of sexual
orientation and gender identity and that the
personnel recruitment and promotion policies of87such organisations are non-discriminatory on the
      basis of sexual orientation or gender identity;

(c) take all necessary legislative, administrative and
      other measures to ensure the full enjoyment of the
      right to express identity or personhood, including
      through speech, deportment, dress, bodily
      characteristics, choice of name or any other means;

(d) ensure that notions of public order, public
      morality, public health and public security are not
      employed to restrict, in a discriminatory manner, any
      exercise of freedom of opinion and expression that
      affirms diverse sexual orientations or gender
      identities;

(e) ensure that the exercise of freedom of opinion
      and expression does not violate the rights and
      freedoms of persons of diverse sexual orientations
      and gender identities;

(f) ensure that all persons, regardless of sexual
      orientation or gender identity, enjoy equal access to
      information and ideas, as well as to participation in
      public debate.”
                                        (Emphasis supplied)

88.   These principles give further content to the fundamental

rights contained inArticles 14, 15, 19and21, and viewed in the

light of these principles also, Section 377 will have to be

declared to be unconstitutional.

89.   Given the aforesaid, it has now to be decided as to

whether the judgment inSuresh Kumar Koushal(supra) is

correct. Suresh Kumar Koushal’s judgment (supra) first

begins with the presumption of constitutionality attaching to pre-88constitutional laws, such as theIndian Penal Code. The

judgment goes on to state that pre-constitutional laws, which

have been adopted by Parliament and used with or without

amendment, being manifestations of the will of the people of

India through Parliament, are presumed to be constitutional.

We are afraid that we cannot agree.

90.Article 372of the Constitution of India continues laws in

force in the territory of India immediately before the

commencement of the Constitution. That theIndian Penal Codeis a law in force in the territory of India immediately before the

commencement of this Constitution is beyond cavil.         UnderArticle 372(2), the President may, by order, make such

adaptations and modifications of an existing law as may be

necessary or expedient to bring such law in accord with the

provisions of the Constitution. The fact that the President has

not made any adaptation or modification as mentioned inArticle

372(2)does not take the matter very much further. The

presumption of constitutionality of a statute is premised on the

fact that Parliament understands the needs of the people, and

that, as per the separation of powers doctrine, Parliament is89aware of its limitations in enacting laws – it can only enact laws

which do not fall within List II of Schedule VII of the Constitution

of India, and cannot transgress the fundamental rights of the

citizens and other constitutional provisions in doing so.

Parliament is therefore deemed to be aware of the aforesaid

constitutional limitations. Where, however, a pre-constitution

law is made by either a foreign legislature or body, none of

these parameters obtain. It is therefore clear that no such

presumption attaches to a pre-constitutional statute like theIndian Penal Code. In fact, in the majority judgment of B.P.

Jeevan Reddy, J. in New Delhi Municipal Council v. State of

Punjab and Ors., (1997) 7 SCC 339, thePunjab Municipal Actof 1911 was deemed to be a post-constitutional law inasmuch

as it was extended to Delhi only in 1950, as a result of which

the presumption of constitutionality was raised. Ahmadi, C.J.’s

dissenting opinion correctly states that if a pre-constitutional law

is challenged, the presumption of constitutional validity would

not obtain. The relevant paragraph is extracted below:-

91.   It is a little difficult to subscribe to the view of the Division

Bench that the presumption of constitutionality of Section 377

would therefore attach.

92.   The fact that the legislature has chosen not to amend the

law, despite the 172nd Law Commission Report specifically

recommending deletion of Section 377, may indicate that

Parliament has not thought it proper to delete the aforesaid

provision, is one more reason for not invalidating Section 377,

according toSuresh Kumar Koushal(supra). This is a little

difficult to appreciate when the Union of India admittedly did not91challenge the Delhi High Court judgment striking down the

provision in part.Secondly, the fact that Parliament may or

may not have chosen to follow a Law Commission Report does

not guide the Court’s understanding of its character, scope,

ambit and import as has been stated inSuresh Kumar

Koushal(supra). It is a neutral fact which need not be taken

into account at all. All that the Court has to see is whether

constitutional provisions have been transgressed and if so, as a

natural corollary, the death knell of the challenged provision

must follow.

93.   It is a little difficult to appreciate the Court stating that the

ambit ofSection 377IPC is only determined with reference to

the sexual act itself and the circumstances in which it is

executed. It is also a little difficult to appreciate that Section 377

regulates sexual conduct regardless of gender identity and

orientation.

94.   After 2013, when Section 375 was amended so as to

include anal and certain other kinds of sexual intercourse

between a man and a woman, which would not be criminalized

as rape if it was between consenting adults, it is clear that if92Section 377 continues to penalize such sexual intercourse, an

anomalous position would result. A man indulging in such

sexual intercourse would not be liable to be prosecuted for rape

but would be liable to be prosecuted under Section 377.

Further, a woman who could, at no point of time, have been

prosecuted for rape would, despite her consent, be prosecuted

for indulging in anal or such other sexual intercourse with a

man in private under Section 377. This would render Section

377, as applied to such consenting adults, as manifestly

arbitrary as it would be wholly excessive and disproportionate

to prosecute such persons under Section 377 when the

legislature has amended one portion of the law in 2013, making

it clear that consensual sex, as described in the amended

provision, between two consenting adults, one a man and one a

woman, would not be liable for prosecution. If, by having regard

to what has been said above, Section 377 has to be read down

as not applying to anal and such other sex by a male-female

couple, then the Section will continue to apply only to

homosexual sex. If this be the case, the Section will offendArticle 14as it will discriminate between heterosexual and93homosexual adults which is a distinction which has no rational

        relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Section -

        namely,       the    criminalization        of    all    carnal     sex      between

        homosexual and/or heterosexual adults as being against the

        order of nature.8 Viewed either way, the Section falls foul ofArticle 14.

95.     The fact that only a minuscule fraction of the country’s

        population constitutes lesbians and gays or transgenders, and

        that in the last 150 years less than 200 persons have been

        prosecuted for committing the offence under Section 377, is

        neither here nor there. When it is found that privacy interests

        come in and the State has no compelling reason to continue an

        existing law which penalizes same-sex couples who cause no

        harm to others, on an application of the recent judgments

        delivered by this Court afterSuresh Kumar Koushal(supra), it

        is clear thatArticles 14, 15, 19and21have all been

        transgressed without any legitimate state rationale to uphold

        such provision.

8 An argument was made by the Petitioners that Section 377, being vague and unintelligible, should be
struck down on this ground as it is not clear as to what is meant by “against the order of nature”. Since
Section 377 applies down the line to carnal sex between human beings and animals as well, which is not
the subject matter of challenge here, it is unnecessary to go into this ground as the Petitioners have
succeeded on other grounds raised by them.

96.   For all these reasons therefore, we are of the view that,Suresh Kumar Koushal(supra) needs to be, and is hereby,

overruled.

97.   We may conclude by stating that persons who are

homosexual have a fundamental right to live with dignity, which,

in the larger framework of the Preamble of India, will assure the

cardinal constitutional value of fraternity that has been

discussed in some of our judgments (See (1) Nandini Sundar v.

State of Chhattisgarh, (2011) 7 SCC 547 at paragraphs 16, 25

and 52; and (2) Subramaniam Swamy v. Union of India(2016)

7 SCC 221 at paragraphs 153 to 156). We further declare that

such groups are entitled to the protection of equal laws, and are

entitled to be treated in society as human beings without any

stigma being attached to any of them. We further declare that

Section 377 insofar as it criminalises homosexual sex and

transgender sex between consenting adults is unconstitutional.

98.   We are also of the view that the Union of India shall take

all measures to ensure that this judgment is given wide publicity

through the public media, which includes television, radio, print

and online media at regular intervals, and initiate programs to95reduce and finally eliminate the stigma associated with such

persons. Above all, all government officials, including and in

particular police officials, and other officers of the Union of India

and the States, be given periodic sensitization and awareness

training of the plight of such persons in the light of the

observations contained in this judgment.

……………………………..J.
                                     (R.F. Nariman)

New Delhi;

September 06, 2018.

E   Beyond physicality: sex, identity and stereotypes
    E.I   Facial neutrality: through the looking glass
    E.2   Deconstructing the polarities of binary genders

F   Confronting the closet
    F.I   Sexual privacy and autonomy- deconstructing the heteronormative
          framework
    F.2   A right to intimacy- celebration of sexual agency


G   Section 377 and the right to health
    G.I   Section 377 and HIV prevention efforts
    G.2   Mental health

H   Judicial review

I   India’s commitments at International Law

J   Transcending borders - comparative law

K   Crime, morality and the Constitution

L   Constitutional morality

M   In summation : transformative constitutionalism4PART A


Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


A        From denial to freedom

                            “What makes life meaningful is love. The right that
                            makes us human is the right to love. To criminalize the
                            expression of that right is profoundly cruel and
                            inhumane. To acquiesce in such criminalization, or
                            worse, to recriminalize it, is to display the very
                            opposite of compassion. To show exaggerated
                            deference to a majoritarian Parliament when the
                            matter is one of fundamental rights is to display judicial
                            pusillanimity, for there is no doubt, that in the
                            constitutional scheme, it is the judiciary that is the
                            ultimate interpreter.”1



1        The lethargy of the law is manifest yet again.

2        A hundred and fifty eight years ago, a colonial legislature made it

criminal, even for consenting adults of the same gender, to find fulfillment in

love. The law deprived them of the simple right as human beings to live, love

and partner as nature made them. The human instinct to love was caged by

constraining the physical manifestation of their sexuality. Gays and lesbians2

were made subordinate to the authority of a coercive state. A charter of

morality made their relationships hateful. The criminal law became a willing

instrument of repression. To engage in ‘carnal intercourse’ against ‘the order

of nature’ risked being tucked away for ten years in a jail. The offence would

1   Justice Leila Seth, “A mother and a judge speaks out on Section 377”, The Times of India, 26 January, 2014.
2   These terms as well as terms such as “LGBT” and “LGBTIQ” used in the judgement are to be construed in an
    inclusive sense to include members of all gender and sexual minorities, whose sexual activity is criminalized by
    the application ofSection 377of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.5PART A


be investigated by searching the most intimate of spaces to find tell-tale signs

of intercourse. Civilisation has been brutal.



3      Eighty seven years after the law was made, India gained her liberation

from a colonial past. But Macaulay’s legacy - the offence under Section 377 of

the Penal Code - has continued to exist for nearly sixty eight years after we

gave ourselves a liberal Constitution. Gays and lesbians, transgenders and

bisexuals continue to be denied a truly equal citizenship seven decades after

Independence. The law has imposed upon them a morality which is an

anachronism. Their entitlement should be as equal participants in a society

governed by the morality of the Constitution. That in essence is what Section

377 denies to them. The shadows of a receding past confront their quest for

fulfillment.

4      Section 377 exacts conformity backed by the fear of penal reprisal.

There is an unbridgeable divide between the moral values on which it is based

and the values of the Constitution. What separates them is liberty and dignity.

We must, as a society, ask searching questions to the forms and symbols of

injustice. Unless we do that, we risk becoming the cause and not just the

inheritors of an unjust society. Does the Constitution allow a quiver of fear to

become the quilt around the bodies of her citizens, in the intimacies which6PART A


define their identities? If there is only one answer to this question, as I believe

there is, the tragedy and anguish which Section 377 inflicts must be remedied.



5     The Constitution brought about a transfer of political power. But it

reflects above all, a vision of a society governed by justice. Individual liberty is

its soul. The constitutional vision of justice accommodates differences of

culture, ideology and orientation. The stability of its foundation lies in its effort

to protect diversity in all its facets: in the beliefs, ideas and ways of living of

her citizens. Democratic as it is, our Constitution does not demand conformity.

Nor does it contemplate the mainstreaming of culture. It nurtures dissent as

the safety valve for societal conflict. Our ability to recognise others who are

different is a sign of our own evolution. We miss the symbols of a

compassionate and humane society only at our peril.



Section 377 provides for rule by the law instead of the rule of law. The rule of

law requires a just law which facilitates equality, liberty and dignity in all its

facets. Rule by the law provides legitimacy to arbitrary state behaviour.



6     Section 377 has consigned a group of citizens to the margins. It has

been destructive of their identities. By imposing the sanctions of the law on

consenting adults involved in a sexual relationship, it has lent the authority of7PART B


the state to perpetuate social stereotypes and encourage discrimination.

Gays, lesbians, bisexuals and transgenders have been relegated to the

anguish of closeted identities. Sexual orientation has become a target for

exploitation, if not blackmail, in a networked and digital age. The impact of

Section 377 has travelled far beyond the punishment of an offence. It has

been destructive of an identity which is crucial to a dignified existence.



7     It is difficult to right the wrongs of history. But we can certainly set the

course for the future. That we can do by saying, as I propose to say in this

case, that lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgenders have a constitutional

right to equal citizenship in all its manifestations. Sexual orientation is

recognised and protected by the Constitution. Section 377 of the Penal Code

is unconstitutional in so far as it penalises a consensual relationship between

adults of the same gender. The constitutional values of liberty and dignity can

accept nothing less.

an affidavit. The Union government states that it leaves a decision on the8PART B


validity of Section 377 ‘to the wisdom of this Court’. Implicit in this is that the

government has no view of its own on the subject and rests content to abide

by the decision of this Court. During the parleys in Court, the ASG however

submitted that the court should confine itself to the reference by ruling upon

the correctness ofSuresh Kumar Koushal v. Naz Foundation3 (“Koushal”).



9         We would have appreciated a categorical statement of position by the

government, setting out its views on the validity of Section 377 and on the

correctness of Koushal. The ambivalence of the government does not obviate

the necessity for a judgment on the issues raised. The challenge to the

constitutional validity of Section 377 must squarely be addressed in this

proceeding. That is plainly the duty of the Court. Constitutional issues are not

decided on concession. The statement of the Union government does not

concede to the contention of the petitioners that the statutory provision is

invalid. Even if a concession were to be made, that would not conclude the

matter for this Court. All that the stand of the government indicates is that it is

to the ‘wisdom’ of this Court that the matter is left. In reflecting upon this

appeal to our wisdom, it is just as well that we as judges remind ourselves of a

truth which can unwittingly be forgotten: flattery is a graveyard for the gullible.




3   (2014) 1 SCC 19PART B


10        Bereft of a submission on behalf of the Union government on a matter of

constitutional principle these proceedings must be dealt with in the only

manner known to the constitutional court: through an adjudication which fulfills

constitutional values and principles.

11        The ASG made a fair submission when he urged that the court should

deal with the matter in reference. The submission, to its credit, would have the

court follow a path of prudence. Prudence requires, after all, that the Court

should address itself to the controversy in the reference without pursuing an

uncharted course beyond it. While accepting the wisdom of the approach

suggested by the ASG, it is nonetheless necessary to make some prefatory

observations on the scope of the reference.

12        The correctness of the decision in Koushal is in question. Koushal [as

indeed the decision of the Delhi High Court inNaz Foundation v.

Government of NCT of Delhi4 (“Naz”)] dealt with the validity of Section 377

which criminalizes even a consensual relationship between adults of the same

gender who engage in sexual conduct (‘carnal intercourse against the order of

nature’). In dealing with the validity of the provision, it is necessary to

understand the nature of the constitutional right which LGBT individuals claim.

4(2010)   Cri LJ 9410PART B


According to them, the right to be in a relationship with a consenting adult of

the same gender emanates from the right to life, as a protected value under

the Constitution. They ground their right on the basis of an identity resting in

their sexual orientation. According to them, their liberty and dignity require

both an acknowledgement as well as a protection under the law, of their

sexual orientation. Representing their identity, based on sexual orientation, to

the world at large and asserting it in their relationship with the community and

the state is stated to be intrinsic to the free exercise of speech and expression

guaranteed by the Constitution. Sexual orientation is claimed to be intrinsic to

the guarantee against discrimination on the ground of sex. The statutory

provision, it has been asserted, also violates the fundamental guarantee

against arbitrariness because it unequally targets gay men whose sexual

expression falls in the area prohibited by Section 377.




13    In answering the dispute in regard to the validity of Section 377, the

court must of necessity understand and explain in a constitutional perspective,

the nature of the right which is claimed. The challenge to Section 377 has to

be understood from the perspective of a rights discourse. While doing so, it

becomes necessary to understand the constitutional source from which the

claim emerges. When a right is claimed to be constitutionally protected, it is

but necessary for the court to analyze the basis of that assertion. Hence, in11PART C


answering the reference, it is crucial for the court to place the entitlement of

the LGBT population in a constitutional framework. We have approached the

matter thus far from the perspective of constitutional analysis. But there is a

more simple line of reasoning as well, grounded as we believe, in common-

sense. Sexual acts between consenting adults of the same gender constitute

one facet – albeit an important aspect – of the right asserted by gay men to

lead fulfilling lives. Gay and lesbian relationships are sustained and nurtured

in every aspect which makes for a meaningful life. In understanding the true

nature of those relationships and the protection which the Constitution affords

to them, it is necessary to adopt a perspective which leads to their acceptance

as equal members of a humane and compassionate society. Forming a

holistic perspective requires the court to dwell on, but not confine itself, to

sexuality. Sexual orientation creates an identity on which there is a

constitutional claim to the entitlement of a dignified life. It is from that broad

perspective that the constitutional right needs to be adjudicated.

intercourse against the order of nature’ an offence. This provision, understood

as prohibiting non-peno vaginal intercourse, reflects the imposition of a

particular set of morals by a colonial power at a particular point in history. A

supposedly alien law,6 Section 377 has managed to survive for over 158

years, impervious to both the anticolonial struggle as well as the formation of

a democratic India, which guarantees fundamental rights to all its citizens. An

inquiry into the colonial origins of Section 377 and its postulations about

sexuality is useful in assessing the relevance of the provision in contemporary

times.7



15       Lord Thomas Babington Macaulay, Chairman of the First Law

Commission of India and principal architect of theIPC, cited two main sources

from which he drew in drafting the Code: the French (Napoleonic) Penal

Code, 1810 and Edward Livingston’s Louisiana Code.8 Lord Macaulay also

5   Lyrics from Leonard Cohen’s song “Democracy” (1992).
6   See Same-Sex Love in India: A Literary History (Ruth Vanita and Saleem Kidwai, eds.), Penguin India (2008) for
    writings spanning over more than 2,000 years of Indian literature which demonstrate that same-sex love has
    flourished, evolved and been embraced in various forms since ancient times.
7   Law like Love: Queer Perspectives on Law (Arvind Narrain and Alok Gupta, eds.), Yoda Press (2011).
8   K. N. Chandrasekharan Pillai and Shabistan Aquil, “Historical Introduction to theIndian Penal Code”, in Essays on
    theIndian Penal Code, New Delhi, Indian Law Institute (2005); Siyuan Chen, “Codification, Macaulay and theIndian Penal Code[Book Review], Singapore Journal of Legal Studies, National University of Singapore, Faculty
    of Law (2011), at pages 581-584.

13PART C


drew inspiration from the English common law and the British Royal

Commission’s 1843 Draft Code.9 Tracing that origin, English jurist Fitzjames

Stephen observes:

9     Douglas E. Sanders, “377 and the Unnatural Afterlife of British Colonialism in Asia”, Asian Journal of Comparative
      Law, Vol. 4 (2009), at page 11 (“Douglas”); David Skuy, “Macaulay and theIndian Penal Codeof 1862: The Myth
      of the Inherent Superiority and Modernity of the English Legal System Compared to India’s Legal System in the
      Nineteenth Century”, Modern Asian Studies, Vol. 32 (1998), at pages 513-557.
10    Barry Wright, “Macaulay’sIndian Penal Code: Historical Context and Originating Principles”, Carleton University
      (2011).

11   Michael Kirby, “The Sodomy Offence: England's Least Lovely Law Export?” Journal of Commonwealth Criminal
      Law, Inaugural Issue (2011).

12   Douglas, supra note 9, at page 4.

13   Ibid at page 2.

14PART C


Another Judeo-Christian religious interpretation refers to “sodomy”, a term

used for anal intercourse that is derived from an interpretation of Genesis

18:20 of the Old Testament,14 known as the story of Sodom and Gomorrah.

Briefly, when two angels took refuge in the home of Lot, the men of the town

of Sodom surrounded the house and demanded that the angels be sent out so

that the men may “know” them (in this interpretation, with sexual

connotations). When Lot offered them his two virgin daughters instead, the

men of Sodom responded by threatening Lot. The angels then blinded the

“Sodomites.”15 The use of the term “sodomites” to describe those who

engaged in anal intercourse emerged in the 13th Century, and the term

“sodomy” was used as a euphemism for a number of sexual ‘sins’ two

centuries earlier.16



16        The preservation of the Judeo-Christian condemnation of homosexuality

is also attributed to the Jewish theologian, Philo of Alexandria, who is

regarded as the father of the Church Fathers and who reviled homosexuals

and called for their execution.17 The condemnation of homosexuality can also

be traced to Roman law. Emperor Justinian’s Code of 529, for instance, stated


14   Douglas, supra note 9, at page 4.

15   Jessica Cecil, “The Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah”, British Broadcasting Company, 11 February 2017.
16   Douglas, supra note 9, at page 4; KSN Murthy’s Criminal Law:Indian Penal Code(KVS Sarma ed), Lexis Nexis
     (2016).

17   Philo, translated by F.H. Colson and G.H. Whitaker, 10 Volumes, (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1929-
     1962).

15PART C


that persons who engaged in homosexual sex were to be executed.18 From

Rome, the condemnation of homosexuality spread across Europe, where it

manifested itself in ecclesiastical law.19 During the Protestant Reformation,

these laws shifted from the ecclesiastical to the criminal domain, beginning

with Germany in 1532.20



While ecclesiastical laws against homosexual intercourse were well

established in England by the 1500s,21 England’s first criminal (non-

ecclesiastical) law was the Buggery Act of 1533, which condemned “the

detestable and abominable vice of buggeri committed with mankind or

beest.”22 “Buggery” is derived from the old French word for heretic, “bougre”,

and was taken to mean anal intercourse.23



17        The Buggery Act, 1533, which was enacted by Henry VIII, made the

offence of buggery punishable by death, and continued to exist for nearly 300

years before it was repealed and replaced by the Offences against the Person

Act, 1828. Buggery, however, remained a capital offence in England until

1861, one year after the enactment of theIPC. The language of Section 377

18   David F. Greenberg and Marcia H. Bystryn, “Christian Intolerance of Homosexuality”, American Journal of
     Sociology, Vol. 88 (1982), at pages 515-548.

19   Douglas, supra note 9, at pages 5 and 8.

20   Ibid at page 5.

21   Ibid at page 2.

22   The Buggery Act, 1533.

23   Douglas, supra note 9, at page 2.

16PART C


has antecedents in the definition of buggery found in Sir Edward Coke’s late

17th Century compilation of English law:24

                 “...Committed by carnal knowledge against the ordinance of
                 the Creator, and order of nature, by mankind with mankind, or
                 with brute beast, or by womankind with brute beast.”25



18      The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1885 made “gross indecency” a

crime in the United Kingdom, and was used to prosecute homosexuals where

sodomy could not be proven. In 1895, Oscar Wilde was arrested under the

Act for ‘committing acts of gross indecency with male persons’.26 During

Wilde’s trial, the Prosecutor, referring to homosexual love, asked him, “What

is ‘the love that dare not speak its name’?” Wilde responded:

PART C


                   does not understand. The world mocks at it, and sometimes
                   puts one in the pillory for it.”27




Wilde was held guilty and was sentenced to two years’ hard labour and

subsequently incarcerated.

Following World War II, arrests and prosecutions of homosexuals increased.

Alan Turing, the renowned mathematician and cryptographer who was

responsible for breaking the Nazi Enigma code during World War II, was

convicted of ‘gross indecency’ in 1952. In order to avoid a prison sentence,

Turing was forced to agree to chemical castration. He was injected with

synthetic female hormones. Less than two years after he began the hormone

treatment, Turing committed suicide. The Amendment Act (also known as the

Labouchere Amendment) remained in English law until 1967. Turing was

posthumously pardoned in 2013, and in 2017, the UK introduced the Policing

and Crime Bill, also called the “Turing Law,” posthumously pardoning 50,000

homosexual men and providing pardons for the living.



In the wake of several court cases in which homosexuality had been featured,

the British Parliament in 1954 set up the Wolfenden Committee, headed by


27   H. Montgomery Hyde, John O'Connor, and Merlin Holland, The Trials of Oscar Wilde (2014), at page 201.18PART C


John Wolfenden, to “consider…the law and practice relating to homosexual

offenses and the treatment of persons convicted of such offenses by the

courts”, as well as the laws relevant to prostitution and solicitation. The

Wolfenden Report of 1957, which was supported by the Church of England,28

proposed that there ‘must remain a realm of private morality and immorality

which is, in brief and crude terms, not the law’s business’ and recommended

that homosexual acts between two consenting adults should no longer be a

criminal offence.29



19      The success of the report led England and Wales to enact The Sexual

Offences Act, 1967, which decriminalized private homosexual sex between

two men over the age of twenty-one. Britain continued to introduce and

amend laws governing same-sex intercourse to make them more equal,

including the lowering of the age of consent for gay/bisexual men to sixteen in

2001.30 In May 2007, in a statement to the UN Human Rights Council, the UK,

which imposed criminal prohibitions against same-sex intercourse in its former

colonies across the world, committed itself to the cause of worldwide

decriminalization of homosexuality.31 Today, India continues to enforce a law



28 Ibid at 25.

29 Report of the Departmental Committee on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution (1957) (“Wolfenden Report”).
30 Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 2000, Parliament of the United Kingdom.
31 Douglas, supra note 9, at page 29.

19PART C


imposed by an erstwhile colonial government, a law that has been long done

away with by the same government in its own jurisdiction.

Jeremy Bentham, who coined the term codification and argued for replacing

existing laws with clear, concise, and understandable provisions that could be

universally applied across the Empire.32 Ironically, in a 1785 essay, Bentham

himself wrote one of the earliest known defences of homosexuality in the

English language, arguing against the criminalization of homosexuality.

However, this essay was only discovered 200 years after his death.33



21         The Law Commission’s 1837 draft of the Penal Code (prepared by Lord

Macaulay) contained two sections (Clauses 361 and 362), which are

considered the immediate precursors to Section 377:

PART C


                  must not be less than two years, and shall also be liable to
                  fine.

362. Whoever, intending to gratify unnatural lust, touches for
                  that purpose any person without that person's free and
                  intelligent consent, shall be punished with imprisonment of
                  either description for a term which may extend to life and
                  must not be less than seven years, and shall also be liable to
                  fine.”




Both the draft clauses are vague in their description of the acts they seek to

criminalize. Lord Macaulay also omitted an explanation to the Clauses. In a

note presented with the 1837 draft, Lord Macaulay elaborated:

PART C


After twenty-five years of revision, theIPCentered into force on 1 January

1862, two years after Lord Macaulay’s death. TheIPCwas the first codified

criminal code in the British Empire. Section 377 of the revised code read as

follows:

Explanation.- Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal
                  intercourse necessary to the offence described in this
                  section.”




22        The Explanation is unique in that it requires proof of penetration –

something that British Law did not. The two clauses in the Draft Code fell

somewhere in between, requiring proof of “touch”.36



By the time India gained independence in 1947, Britain had introduced Penal

Codes similar to theIPCin other former colonies, including Zanzibar

(Tanzania) in 1867, Singapore, Malaysia, and Brunei in 1871, Ceylon (Sri

Lanka) in 1885, Burma (Myanmar) in 1886,37 East Africa Protectorate (Kenya)


35   Changed from “transportation for life” by Act 26 of 1955.
36   Douglas, supra note 9, at page 16.

37   Nang Yin Kham, “An Introduction to the Law and Judicial System of Myanmar”, Centre for Asia Legal Studies
     Faculty of Law, National University of Singapore, Working Paper 14/02, (2014).22PART C


in 1897, Sudan in 1889, Uganda in 1902, and Tanganyika (Tanzania) in

1920.38 UnderArticle 372(1)of the Indian Constitution, which provides that all

laws in force prior to the commencement of the Constitution shall continue to

be in force until altered or repealed, theIPCand many other pre-

Independence laws were “saved” and allowed to operate in Independent

India.

23        While Section 377 has been used to prosecute non-consensual sexual

acts, it has also been used to prosecute consensual sexual acts. In

(Meharban) Nowshirwan Irani v. Emperor39, for instance, a police officer

observed Nowshirwan, a young shopkeeper, engaged in homosexual acts

with a young man, Ratansi, through a keyhole in Nowshirwan’s house. The

Prosecution argued that the acts were non-consensual, but could not prove

coercion.40 The High Court of Sindh ultimately set aside the conviction based

on insufficient evidence. Nevertheless, what should have been an intimate act

between two consenting parties in their bedroom became a public scandal

and the subject of judicial scrutiny.41



38   Supra note 34.

39   AIR 1934 Sind. 206.

40   Arvind Narrain, “‘That Despicable Specimen of Humanity’: Policing of Homosexuality in India”, in Challenging the
     Rule(s) of Law: Colonialism, Criminology and Human Rights in India (Kalpana Kannabiran and Ranbir Singh
     eds.), Sage (2008).

41   Arvind Narrain, “A New Language of Morality: From the Trial of Nowshirwan to the Judgement in Naz Foundation”,
     The Indian Journal of Constitutional Law, Vol. 4 (2010).23PART C


In D P Minwalla v. Emperor42, Minawalla and Tajmahomed, were seen

having anal intercourse in a lorry and were arrested, charged, and found guilty

under Section 377. Tajmahomed was sentenced to four months rigorous

imprisonment, and Minawalla, who was charged with abetment, was

sentenced to a fine of Rs 100 and imprisonment until the rising of the Bench.

Minawalla appealed the decision on the grounds that he was not a consenting

partner, and submitted himself to a medical exam. The judge was

unconvinced, however, and Minawalla’s original sentence was upheld.The

Court, convinced that the acts were consensual, found the men guilty under

Section 377.43



InRatan Mia v. State of Assam44, the Court convicted two men (one aged

fifteen and a half, the other twenty) under Section 377 and treated them as

equally culpable, as he was unable to cast one of them as the perpetrator and

the other as the victim or abettor. Both men were originally sentenced to

imprisonment for six months and a fine of Rs 100. After Nur had spent six

years in prison and appealed three times,45 both men's sentences were




42    AIR 1935 Sind. 78.

43   Supra note 40.

44   (1988) Cr.L.J. 980.

45   Suparna Bhaskaran, “The Politics of Penetration:Section 377of the Indian Penal Code” in Queering India: Same-

Sex Love and Eroticism in Indian Culture and Society (Ruth Vanita ed.), Routledge (2002).24PART C


reduced to seven days rigorous imprisonment, in view of the fact that they

were first time offenders under the age of twenty-one.46



Even though the government is not proactively enforcing a law that governs

private activities, the psychological impact for homosexuals who are, for all

practical purposes, felons in waiting, is damaging in its own right:

46   Ibid.

47    Douglas, supra note 9, at page 21; “Introduction” to Because I Have a Voice: Queer Politics in India, (Gautam
      Bhan and Arvind Narrain eds), Yoda Press (2005) at pages 7, 8.
48   Melba Cuddy-Keane, Adam Hammond and Alexandra Peat, “Q” in Modernism: Keywords, Wiley-Blackwell (2014).25PART C


century, however, saw the LGBTIQ community emerge from the shadows

worldwide, poised to agitate and demand equal civil rights. LGBTIQ

movements focused on issues of intersectionality, the interplay of oppressions

arising from being both queer and lower class, coloured, disabled, and so on.

Despite the movement making numerous strides forward in the fight for equal

rights, incidents of homosexual arrests were nevertheless extant at the turn of

the 21st century.

In many cases of unfulfilled civil rights, there is a tendency to operate under

the philosophy articulated by Dr. Martin Luther King, that “the arc of the moral

universe is long, but it bends towards justice.” It is likely that those who

subscribe to this philosophy believe that homosexuals should practice the

virtue of patience, and wait for society to understand and accept their way of

life. What those who purport this philosophy fail to recognize is that Dr King

himself argued against the doctrine of “wait”:

The case is about an aspiration to realise constitutional rights. It is about a

right which every human being has, to live with dignity. It is about enabling

these citizens to realise the worth of equal citizenship. Above all, our decision

will speak to the transformative power of the Constitution. For it is in the

transformation of society that the Constitution seeks to assure the values of a

just, humane and compassionate existence to all her citizens.




49   Martin Luther King Jr., “Letter from a Birmingham Jail” (1963).

27PART D


D       An equal love



                                        “Through Love's Great Power

                               Through love's great power to be made whole
                                    In mind and body, heart and soul –
                                     Through freedom to find joy, or be
                                         By dint of joy itself set free
                                      In love and in companionhood:

This is the true and natural good.

To undo justice, and to seek
                                 To quash the rights that guard the weak -

To sneer at love, and wrench apart
                                    The bonds of body, mind and heart
                                   With specious reason and no rhyme:

This is the true unnatural crime.”50Article 14is our fundamental charter of equality:

50 Vikram Seth wrote this poem the morning after the Supreme Court refused to review its decision in Koushal.
51 Naz Foundation, at para 91.

52 Koushal, at para 65.

28PART D


Section 377 does not suffer from arbitrariness or from an irrational

classification.

26         A litany of our decisions – to refer to them individually would be a

parade of the familiar – indicates that to be a reasonable classification underArticle 14of the Constitution, two criteria must be met: (i) the classification

must be founded on an intelligible differentia; and (ii) the differentia must have

a rational nexus to the objective sought to be achieved by the legislation.53

There must, in other words, be a causal connection between the basis of

classification and the object of the statute. If the object of the classification is

illogical, unfair and unjust, the classification will be unreasonable.54



27         Equating the content of equality with the reasonableness of a

classification on which a law is based advances the cause of legal formalism.

The problem with the classification test is that what constitutes a reasonable

classification is reduced to a mere formula: the quest for an intelligible

differentia and the rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved. In doing

so, the test of classification risks elevating form over substance. The danger

inherent in legal formalism lies in its inability to lay threadbare the values

which guide the process of judging constitutional rights. Legal formalism

53State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar, AIR (1952) SC 75.54Deepak Sibal v. Punjab University, (1989) 2 SCC 145.29PART D


buries the life-giving forces of the Constitution under a mere mantra. What it

ignores is thatArticle 14contains a powerful statement of values – of the

substance of equality before the law and the equal protection of laws. To

reduce it to a formal exercise of classification may miss the true value of

equality as a safeguard against arbitrariness in state action. As our

constitutional jurisprudence has evolved towards recognizing the substantive

content of liberty and equality, the core ofArticle 14has emerged out of the

shadows of classification.Article 14has a substantive content on which,

together with liberty and dignity, the edifice of the Constitution is built. Simply

put, in that avatar, it reflects the quest for ensuring fair treatment of the

individual in every aspect of human endeavor and in every facet of human

existence.

InE P Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu55, the validity of state action was

made subject to the test of arbitrariness:

55   (1974) 4 SCC 330PART D


Four decades later, the test has been refined inShayara Bano v. Union of

India56:

PART D


as ‘carnal intercourse against the order of nature.’”59 Yet Koushal upheld the

classification of sexual acts in Section 377 without explaining the difference

between the classes, or the justification for treating the classes differently.


This lack of reasoning and analysis by the Court has been critiqued in

scholarly research on the subject. The following extract sums up the criticism

with telling effect:

PART D


permissible and impermissible intimacies between consenting adults?

Homosexuality has been documented in almost 1500 species, who

“unfortunately are not blessed with rational capabilities (and the propensity to

‘nurture’ same sex thoughts) as are found in mankind.”61 An interesting article

in this regard notes that, “no species has been found in which homosexual

behaviour has not been shown to exist, with the exception of species that

never have sex at all, such as sea urchins and aphis.”62



29        In an incisive article,63 Ambrosino discusses the shift from reproductive

instinct to erotic desire and how crucial this shift is to understanding modern

notions of sexuality. He analyses how the lines between homosexuality and

heterosexuality are blurred, and perhaps even an outdated myth or invention

when we understand the fluidity of sexual identities today:64

                  ““No one knows exactly why heterosexuals and homosexuals
                  ought to be different,” wrote Wendell Ricketts, author of the
                  1984 study Biological Research on Homosexuality. The best
                  answer we’ve got is something of a tautology: “heterosexuals
                  and homosexuals are considered different because they can
                  be divided into two groups on the basis of the belief that they
                  can be divided into two groups.”

                  Though the hetero/homo divide seems like an eternal,
                  indestructible fact of nature, it simply isn’t. It’s merely one
                  recent grammar humans have invented to talk about what sex
                  means to us.”

61    Shamnad Basheer, Sroyon Mukherjee and Karthy Nair, “Section 377 and the ‘Order of Nature’: Nurturing
     ‘Indeterminacy’ in the Law”, NUJS Law Review, Vol, 2 (2009).
62    Bruce Bagemihl, Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity, Stonewall Inn Editions
     (2000).

63   Brandon Ambrosino, “The Invention of Heterosexuality”, British Broadcasting Company, 26 March, 2017.
64   Ibid.

33PART D


He questions the elevated status of ‘normalcy’ in the following words:

65   Zaid Al Baset, “Section 377 and the Myth of Heterosexuality”, Jindal Global Law Review, Vol. 4 (2012).
66   Ibid.

34PART D


of sexual desire and becomes a pervasive norm that structures all societal

structures.67



The expression ‘carnal’ is susceptible to a wide range of meanings. Among

them are:

67   Ibid.

35PART D


some of them as against the order of nature. It does so, on the basis of a

social hypocrisy which the law embraces as its own. It would have human

beings lead sanitized lives, in which physical relationships are conditioned by

a moral notion of what nature does or does not ordain. It would have human

beings accept a way of life in which sexual contact without procreation is an

aberration and worse still, penal. It would ask of a section of our citizens that

while love, they may, the physical manifestation of their love is criminal. This

is manifest arbitrariness writ large.

If it is difficult to locate any intelligible differentia between indeterminate terms

such as ‘natural’ and ‘unnatural’, then it is even more problematic to say that a

classification between individuals who supposedly engage in ‘natural’

intercourse and those who engage in ‘carnal intercourse against the order of

nature’ can be legally valid.

In addition to the problem regarding the indeterminacy of the terms, there is a

logical fallacy in ascribing legality or illegality to the ostensibly universal

meanings of ‘natural’ and ‘unnatural’ as is pointed out in a scholarly article.68

Basheer, et al make this point effectively:

68   Supra note 61.

36PART D


                    person who walks on his hands all the time. Although this
                    may be unnatural, it is certainly not deserving of legal
                    censure.

…In fact, several activities that might be seen to contravene
                    the order of nature (heart transplants, for example) are
                    beneficial and desirable. Even if an unnatural act is harmful to
                    the extent that it justifies criminal sanctions being imposed
                    against it, the reason for proscribing such an act would be
                    that the act is harmful, and not that it is unnatural.”



Indeed, there is no cogent reasoning to support the idea that behaviour that

may be uncommon on the basis of mere statistical probability is necessarily

abnormal and must be deemed ethically or morally wrong.69 Even behaviour

that may be considered wrong or unnatural cannot be criminalised without

sufficient justification given the penal consequences that follow. Section 377

becomes a blanket offence that covers supposedly all types of non-

procreative ‘natural’ sexual activity without any consideration given to the

notions of consent and harm.

30         The meaning of ‘natural’ as understood in cases such as Khanu v.

Emperor70, which interpreted natural sex to mean only sex that would lead to

procreation, would lead to absurd consequences. Some of the consequences

have been pointed out thus:

While it is evident that the classification is invalid, it is useful to understand its

purported goal by looking at the legislative history of Section 377. In

Macaulay’s first draft of the Penal Code, the predecessor to present day

Section 377 was Clause 36172 which provided a severe punishment for

touching another for the purpose of ‘unnatural’ lust. Macaulay abhorred the

idea of any debate or discussion on this ‘heinous crime’. India’s anti-sodomy

law was conceived, legislated and enforced by the British without any kind of

public discussion.73 So abhorrent was homosexuality to the moral notions

which he espoused, that Macaulay believed that the idea of a discussion was


71   Andrew Davis, “The Framing of Sex: Evaluating Judicial Discourse on the 'Unnatural Offences'”, Alternative Law
     Journal, Vol. 5 (2006).

72   Clause 361 stated “Whoever, intending to gratify unnatural lust, touches, for that purpose, any person, or any
     animal, or is by his own consent touched by any person, for the purpose of gratifying unnatural lust, shall be
     punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years and must not be
     less than two years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
73   Alok Gupta, “Section 377 and the Dignity of Indian Homosexuals” The Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 41
     (2006).

38PART D


repulsive. Section 377 reveals only the hatred, revulsion and disgust of the

draftsmen towards certain intimate choices of fellow human beings. The

criminalization of acts in Section 377 is not based on a legally valid distinction,

“but on broad moral proclamations that certain kinds of people, singled out by

their private choices, are less than citizens – or less than human.”74



31        The Naz judgement has been criticised on the ground that even though

it removed private acts between consenting adults from the purview of Section

377, it still retained the section along with its problematic terminology

regarding the ‘order of nature’:75

                   “…even though the acts would not be criminal, they would still
                   be categorized as “unnatural” in the law. This is not an idle
                   terminological issue. As Durkheim noted over a hundred
                   years ago, the law also works as a tool that expresses social
                   relations.76 Hence, this expression itself is problematic from a
                   dignitarian standpoint, otherwise so eloquently referred to by
                   the judgement.”

At this point, we look at some of the legislative changes that have taken place

in India’s criminal law since the enactment of the Penal Code.The Criminal

Law (Amendment) Act2013 imported certain understandings of the concept of

sexual intercourse into its expansive definition of rape inSection 375of the

Indian Penal Code, which now goes beyond penile–vaginal penetrative



74   Supra note 25.

75   John Sebastian, “The opposite of unnatural intercourse: understanding Section 377 through Section 375, Indian
     Law Review, Vol. 1 (2018).

76   Emile Durkheim, The Division of Labour in Society, Macmillan (1984).39PART D


intercourse.77 It has been argued that if ‘sexual intercourse’ now includes

many acts which were covered under Section 377, those acts are clearly not

‘against the order of nature’ anymore. They are, in fact, part of the changed

meaning of sexual intercourse itself. This means that much of Section 377 has

not only been rendered redundant but that the very word ‘unnatural’ cannot

have the meaning that was attributed to it before the 2013 amendment.78

Section 375 defines the expression rape in an expansive sense, to include

any one of several acts committed by a man in relation to a woman. The

offence of rape is established if those acts are committed against her will or

without the free consent of the woman. Section 375 is a clear indicator that in

a heterosexual context, certain physical acts between a man and woman are

excluded from the operation of penal law if they are consenting adults. Many

of these acts which would have been within the purview of Section 377, stand

77    375. A man is said to commit “rape” if he- (a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra
     or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or (b) inserts, to any extent, any object or
     a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with
     him or any other person; or (c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into the
     vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or

(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person,
     under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions:— First.—Against her will.
     Secondly.—Without her consent. Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her
     or any person in whom she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt. Fourthly.—With her consent, when the man
     knows that he is not her husband and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to
     whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married. Fifthly.—With her consent when, at the time of giving such
     consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through
     another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences
     of that to which she gives consent Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of
     age. Seventhly.—When she is unable to communicate consent. Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section,
     "vagina" shall also include labia majora. Explanation 2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement
     when the woman by words, gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates
     willingness to participate in the specific sexual act: Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the
     act of penetration shall not by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
     Exception 1.—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape. Exception 2.—Sexual intercourse or
     sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
78   Supra note 75, at pages 232-249.

40PART D


excluded from criminal liability when they take place in the course of

consensual heterosexual contact. Parliament has ruled against them being

regarded against the ‘order of nature’, in the context of Section 375. Yet those

acts continue to be subject to criminal liability, if two adult men or women were

to engage in consensual sexual contact. This is a violation ofArticle 14.Nivedita Menon opposes the idea that ‘normal’ sexuality springs from nature

and argues that this idea of ‘normal’ sexuality is a cultural and social

construct:79

                   “Consider the possibility that rules of sexual conduct are as
                   arbitrary as traffic rules, created by human societies to
                   maintain a certain sort of order, and which could differ from
                   place to place -- for example, you drive on the left in India and
                   on the right in the USA. Further, let us say you question the
                   sort of social order that traffic rules keep in place. Say you
                   believe that traffic rules in Delhi are the product of a model of
                   urban planning that privileges the rich and penalizes the poor,
                   that this order encourages petrol-consuming private vehicles
                   and discourages forms of transport that are energy-saving --
                   cycles, public transport, pedestrians. You would then question
                   that model of the city that forces large numbers of inhabitants
                   to travel long distances every day simply to get to school
                   andwork. You could debate the merits of traffic rules and
                   urban planning on the grounds of convenience, equity and
                   sustainability of natural resources -- at least, nobody could
                   seriously argue that any set of traffic rules is natural.”



32        The struggle of citizens belonging to sexual minorities is located within

the larger history of the struggles against various forms of social subordination


79   Nivedita Menon, “How Natural is Normal? Feminism and Compulsory Heterosexuality”, In Because I have a Voice,
     Queer Politics in India, (Narrain and Bhan eds.) Yoda Press (2005).41PART E


in India. The order of nature that Section 377 speaks of is not just about non-

procreative sex but is about forms of intimacy which the social order finds

“disturbing”.80 This includes various forms of transgression such as inter-caste

and inter-community relationships which are sought to be curbed by society.

What links LGBT individuals to couples who love across caste and community

lines is the fact that both are exercising their right to love at enormous

personal risk and in the process disrupting existing lines of social authority.81

Thus, a re-imagination of the order of nature as being not only about the

prohibition of non-procreative sex but instead about the limits imposed by

structures such as gender, caste, class, religion and community makes the

right to love not just a separate battle for LGBT individuals, but a battle for

all.82




E         Beyond physicality: sex, identity and stereotypes

                   “Only in the most technical sense is this a case about who
                   may penetrate whom where. At a practical and symbolical
                   level it is about the status, moral citizenship and sense of self-
                   worth of a significant section of the community. At a more
                   general and conceptual level, it concerns the nature of the
                   open, democratic and pluralistic society contemplated by the
                   Constitution.”83




80   Supra note 7.

81   Ibid.

82   Supra note 7.

83   The National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality v. The Minister of Justice, 1999 (1) SA 6 (CC), Sachs J.,
      concurring.

42PART E


33        The Petitioners contend that (i) Section 377 discriminates on the basis

of sex and violatesArticles 15and16;and (ii) Discrimination on the ground of

sexual orientation is in fact, discrimination on the ground of sex. The

intervenors argue that (i) Section 377 criminalizes acts and not people; (ii) It is

not discriminatory because the prohibition on anal and oral sex applies equally

to both heterosexual and homosexual couples; and (iii)Article 15prohibits

discrimination on the ground of ‘sex’ which cannot be interpreted so broadly

as to include ‘sexual orientation’.

34        When the constitutionality of a law is challenged on the ground that it

violates the guarantees in Part III of the Constitution, what is determinative is

its effect on the infringement of fundamental rights.84 This affords the

guaranteed freedoms their true potential against a claim by the state that the

infringement of the right was not the object of the provision. It is not the object

of the law which impairs the rights of the citizens. Nor is the form of the action

taken determinative of the protection that can be claimed. It is the effect of the

law upon the fundamental right which calls the courts to step in and remedy

the violation. The individual is aggrieved because the law hurts. The hurt to

the individual is measured by the violation of a protected right. Hence, while


84   Re. the Kerala Education Bill, AIR 1958 SC 956 at para 26;Sakal Papers v Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 305 at
     para 42; R.C. Cooper v Union of India, (1970) 1 SCC 248 at paras 43, 49;Bennett Coleman v. Union of India,
     AIR (1972) 2 SCC 788 at para 39;Maneka Gandhi v Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248 at para 19.43PART E


assessing whether a law infringes a fundamental right, it is not the intention of

the lawmaker that is determinative, but whether the effect or operation of the

law infringes fundamental rights.

Article 15of the Constitution reads thus:

85   AIR (1951) Cal. 563.

44PART E


cost if they did not possess sufficient movable property in India only if they

were residing outside India. However, women were responsible for paying

such security, regardless of whether or not they were residing in India. In

other words, the law drew a distinction between resident males who did not

have sufficient immovable property, and resident females who did not have

sufficient immovable property. Upholding the provision, the Calcutta High

Court held:

86   (1981) 4 SCC 33545PART E


absolute discretion of the Managing Director. Even though the two cadres

were constituted on the grounds of sex, the Court upheld the Regulations in

part and opined:

This narrow view ofArticle 15strips the prohibition on discrimination of its

essential content. This fails to take into account the intersectional nature of

sex discrimination, which cannot be said to operate in isolation of other

identities, especially from the socio-political and economic context. For

example, a rule that people over six feet would not be employed in the army

would be able to stand an attack on its disproportionate impact on women if it

was maintained that the discrimination is on the basis of sex and height. Such46PART E


a formalistic view of the prohibition inArticle 15, rejects the true operation of

discrimination, which intersects varied identities and characteristics.



37         A divergent note was struck by this Court inAnuj Garg v. Hotel

Association of India87.Section 30of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 prohibited

the employment of women (and men under 25 years) in premises where liquor

or other intoxicating drugs were consumed by the public. Striking down the

law as suffering from “incurable fixations of stereotype morality and

conception of sexual role”, the Court held:

In Nergesh Meerza, this Court held that where persons of a particular class,

in view of the “special attributes, qualities” are treated differently in ‘public

interest’, such a classification would not be discriminatory. The Court opined

that since the modes of recruitment, promotional avenues and other matters

were different for Air Hostesses, they constituted a class separate from male

Flight Pursers. This, despite noting that “a perusal of the job functions which

have been detailed in the affidavit, clearly shows that the functions of the two,

though obviously different overlap on some points but the difference, if any, is

one of degree rather than of kind.”




38    The Court did not embark on the preliminary enquiry as to whether the

initial classification between the two cadres, being grounded in sex, was

violative of the constitutional guarantee against discrimination. Referring

specifically to the three significant disabilities that the Regulations imposed on

Air Hostesses, the Court held that “there can be no doubt that these peculiar

conditions do form part of the Regulations governing Air Hostesses but once

we have held that Air Hostesses form a separate category with different and49PART E


separate incidents the circumstances pointed out by the petitioners cannot

amount to discrimination so as to violateArticle 14of the Constitution on this

ground.”




39    The basis of the classification was that only men could become male

Flight Pursers and only women could become Air Hostesses. The very

constitution of the cadre was based on sex. What this meant was, that to pass

the non-discrimination test found inArticle 15, the State merely had to create

two separate classes based on sex and constitute two separate cadres. That

would not be discriminatory.

The Court went a step ahead and opined:

40    A strong stereotype underlines the judgment. The Court did not

recognize that men were not subject to the same standards with respect to

marriage. It holds that the burdens of health and family planning rest solely on

women. This perpetuates the notion that the obligations of raising family are

those solely of the woman. In dealing with the provision for termination of

service on the first pregnancy, the Court opined that a substituted provision for

termination on the third pregnancy would be in the “larger interest of the

health of the Air Hostesses concerned as also for the good upbringing of the

children.” Here again, the Court’s view rested on a stereotype. The patronizing

attitude towards the role of women compounds the difficulty in accepting the

logic of Nergesh Meerza. This approach, in my view, is patently incorrect.



41    A discriminatory act will be tested against constitutional values. A

discrimination will not survive constitutional scrutiny when it is grounded in

and perpetuates stereotypes about a class constituted by the grounds

prohibited inArticle 15(1).If any ground of discrimination, whether direct or

indirect is founded on a stereotypical understanding of the role of the sex, it

would not be distinguishable from the discrimination which is prohibited byArticle 15on the grounds only of sex. If certain characteristics grounded in

stereotypes, are to be associated with entire classes of people constituted as

groups by any of the grounds prohibited inArticle 15(1), that cannot establish51PART E


a permissible reason to discriminate. Such a discrimination will be in violation

of the constitutional guarantee against discrimination inArticle 15(1).That

such a discrimination is a result of grounds rooted in sex and other

considerations, can no longer be held to be a position supported by the

intersectional understanding of how discrimination operates. This infusesArticle 15with true rigour to give it a complete constitutional dimension in

prohibiting discrimination.

The approach adopted the Court in Nergesh Meerza, is incorrect.



A provision challenged as being ultra vires the prohibition of discrimination on

the grounds only of sex underArticle 15(1)is to be assessed not by the

objects of the state in enacting it, but by the effect that the provision has on

affected individuals and on their fundamental rights. Any ground of

discrimination, direct or indirect, which is founded on a particular

understanding of the role of the sex, would not be distinguishable from the

discrimination which is prohibited byArticle 15on the grounds only of sex.


E.I   Facial neutrality: through the looking glass


42    The moral belief which underlies Section 377 is that sexual activities

which do not result in procreation are against the ‘order of nature’ and ought52PART E


to be criminalized under Section 377. The intervenors submit that Section

377, criminalizes anal and oral sex by heterosexual couples as well. Hence, it

is urged that Section 377 applies equally to all conduct against the ‘order of

nature’, irrespective of sexual orientation. This submission is incorrect. In

NALSA this Court held that Section 377, though associated with specific

sexual acts, highlights certain identities. In Naz, the Delhi High Court

demonstrated effectively how Section 377 though facially neutral in its

application to certain acts, targets specific communities in terms of its impact:

PART E


disadvantage, exclusion and indignity for the LGBT community, and for

individuals who indulge in non-heterosexual conduct.



43         Jurisprudence across national frontiers supports the principle that

facially neutral action by the State may have a disproportionate impact upon a

particular class. In Europe, Directive 2006/54/EC of the European

Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2006 defines ‘indirect

discrimination’ as: “where an apparently neutral provision, criterion or practice

would put persons of one sex at a particular disadvantage compared with

persons of the other sex, unless that provision, criterion or practice is

objectively justified by a legitimate aim, and the means of achieving that aim

are appropriate and necessary.”



In Griggs v Duke Power Co.93, the US Supreme Court, whilst recognizing

that African-Americans received sub-standard education due to segregated

schools, opined that the requirement of an aptitude/intelligence test

disproportionately affected African-American candidates. The Court held that

“The Civil Rights Act” proscribes not only overt discrimination but also

practices that are fair in form, but discriminatory in operation.”




93   401 U.S. 424 (1971)54PART E


In Bilka-Kaufhaus GmbH v. Karin Weber von Hartz94, the European Court

of Justice held that denying pensions to part-time employees is more likely to

affect women, as women were more likely to take up part-time jobs. The Court

noted:

94   (1986) ECR 1607
95    (1989) 1 SCR 14355PART E


withholds or limits access to opportunities, benefits, and advantages available

to other members of society”,96 it would be suspect.



In City Council of Pretoria v. Walker97, the Constitutional Court of South

Africa observed:

96   Ibid.

97   (1998) 3 BCLR 25756PART E


The notion that the nature of relationships is fixed and within the ‘order of

nature’ is perpetuated by gender roles, thus excluding homosexuality from the

narrative. The effect is described as follows:

98    Elvia R. Arriola, “Gendered Inequality: Lesbians, Gays, and Feminist Legal Theory”, Berkeley Women’s Law
      Journal, Vol. 9 (1994), at pages 103-143.

99   Zachary A. Kramer, “The Ultimate Gender Stereotype: Equalizing Gender-Conforming and Gender-Nonconforming
      Homosexuals under Title VII”, University of Illinois Law Review (2004), at page 490.57PART E


therefore, repugnant to heterosexist societal expectations. Kramer argues

that:

100   Ibid.

101    Bennett Capers, “Note, Sexual Orientation and Title VII”, Columbia Law Review (1991), at pages 1159, 1160,
      1163.

58PART E


In other words, one cannot simply separate discrimination based on sexual

orientation and discrimination based on sex because discrimination based on

sexual orientation inherently promulgates ideas about stereotypical notions of

sex and gender roles. Taking this further, Andrew Koppelman argues that:

102    Andrew Koppelman, “The Miscegenation Analogy: Sodomy Law as Sex Discrimination”, Yale Law Journal, Vol.

98 (1988), at page 147.

103   Andrew Koppelman, “Why Discrimination against Lesbians and Gay Men is Sex Discrimination”, New York
      University Law Review, Vol. 69 (1994).

104   Supra note 102, at page 148.

59PART E


Statutes like Section 377 give people ammunition to say “this is what a man

is” by giving them a law which says “this is what a man is not.” Thus, laws that

affect non-heterosexuals rest upon a normative stereotype: “the bald

conviction that certain behavior-for example, sex with women-is appropriate

for members of one sex, but not for members of the other sex.” 105



What this shows us is that LGBT individuals as well as those who do not

conform to societal expectations of sexual behaviour defy gender stereotypes.

“The construction of gender stereotypes ultimately rests on the
                  assumption that there are two opposite and mutually exclusive
                  biological sexes. The assumption of heterosexuality is central
                  to this gender binary. In a patriarchal context, some of the
                  most serious transgressors are thus: a woman who renounces
                  a man sexual partner or an individual assigned female at birth
                  who renounces womanhood, thereby rejecting the patriarchal
                  system and all other forms of male supervision and control,
                  and an individual assigned male at birth who embraces
                  womanhood, thereby abandoning privilege in favor of that
                  which is deemed subservient, femininity.”106



Prohibition of sex discrimination is meant to change traditional practices which

legally, and often socially and economically, disadvantage persons on the

basis of gender. The case for gay rights undoubtedly seeks justice for gays.

But it goes well beyond the concern for the gay community. The effort to end




105    Ibid.

106    The Relationship between Homophobia, Transphobia, and Women’s Access to Justice for the Forthcoming
      CEDAW General Recommendation on Women’s Access to Justice. Submitted to the United Nations Committee
      for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (2013).60PART E


discrimination against gays should be understood as a necessary part of the

larger effort to end the inequality of the sexes.

“To be a lesbian is to be perceived (labelled) as someone
                    who has stepped out of line, who has moved out of
                    sexual/economic dependence on a male, who is woman-
                    identified. A lesbian is perceived as someone who can live
                    without a man, and who is therefore (however illogically)
                    against men. A lesbian is perceived as being outside the
                    acceptable, routinized order of things. She is seen as
                    someone who has no societal institutions to protect her and
                    who is not privileged to the protection of individual males. A
                    lesbian is perceived as a threat to the nuclear family, to male
                    dominance and control, to the very heart of sexism.”107



Commenting on its link with the essence ofArticle 15, Tarunabh Khaitan

writes:

107   Suzanne Pharr, Homophobia: A weapon of Sexism, Chardon Press (1988), at page18.
108   Tarunabh Khaitan, “Inclusive Pluralism or Majoritarian Nationalism:Article 15, Section 377 and Who We Really
      Are”, Indian Constitutional Law and Philosophy (2018).61PART E


relationships premised on care and reciprocity, lay challenge to the idea that

relationships, and by extension society, must be divided along hierarchical

sexual roles in order to function. For members of the community, hostility and

exclusion aimed at them, drive them into hiding, away from public expression

and view. It is this discrimination faced by the members of the community,

which results in silence, and consequently invisibility, creating barriers,

systemic and deliberate, that effect their participation in the work force and

thus undermines substantive equality. In the sense that the prohibition of

miscegenation was aimed to preserve and perpetuate the polarities of race to

protect white supremacy, the prohibition of homosexuality serves to ensure a

larger system of social control based on gender and sex.



48        A report prepared by the International Commission of Jurists109 has

documented the persecution faced by the affected community due to the

operation of Section 377. The report documents numerous violations inflicted

on people under the authority of Section 377. According to the National Crime

Records Bureau, 1279 persons in 2014 and 1491 in 2015 were arrested under

Section 377.110




109   International Commission of Jurists, “Unnatural Offences” Obstacles to Justice in India Based on Sexual
      Orientation and Gender Identity (2017).

110   Ibid, at page 16.

62PART E


The report documents instances of abuse from law enforcement agencies and

how the possibility of persecution under Section 377 prevents redress.111

Even though acts such as blackmail, assault, and bodily crimes are

punishable under penal laws, such methods of seeking redressal are not

accessed by those communities given the fear of retaliation or prosecution.



49         The petitioners in the present batch of cases have real life narrations of

suffering discrimination, prejudice and hate.InAnwesh Pokkuluri v. UOI112,

with which this case is connected, the Petitioners are a group of persons

belonging to the LGBTQ community, each of whom has excelled in their fields

but suffer immensely due to the operation of Section 377. To cope with the

growing isolation among the community, these Petitioners, all alumni of Indian

Institutes of Technology across the country, created a closed group called

“Pravritti”. The group consists of persons from the LGBTQ community. They

are faculty members, students, alumni and anyone who has ever stayed on

the campus of any IIT in the country. The group was formed in 2012 to help

members cope with loneliness and difficulties faced while accepting their

identity along with holding open discussions on awareness.




111   Ibid, at pages 16 – 18.

112   Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 121 of 2018.

63PART E


50    Out of twenty Petitioners, sixteen are gay, two are bisexual women and

one is a bisexual man. One among the Petitioners is a transwoman. Three of

the Petitioners explain that they suffered immense mental agony due to which

they were on the verge of committing suicide. Another two stated that

speaking about their sexual identity has been difficult, especially since they

did not have the support of their families, who, upon learning of their sexual

orientation, took them for psychiatric treatment to cure the so-called “disease.”

The families of three Petitioners ignored their sexual identity. One of them

qualified to become an Indian Administrative Services officer in an

examination which more than 4,00,000 people write each year. But he chose

to forgo his dream because of the fear that he would be discriminated against

on the ground of his sexuality. Some of them have experienced depression;

others faced problems focusing on their studies while growing up; one among

them was forced to drop out of high school as she was residing in a girl’s

hostel where the authorities questioned her identity. The parents of one of

them brushed his sexuality under the carpet and suggested that he marry a

woman.Some doubted whether or not they should continue their relationships

given the atmosphere created by Section 377. Several work in organisations

that have policies protecting the LGBT community in place. Having faced so

much pain in their personal lives, the Petitioners submit that with the

continued operation of Section 377, such treatment will be unabated.64PART E


51         InNavtej Johar v. Union of India113, with which this case is concerned,

the Petitioners have set out multiple instances of discrimination and expulsion.

The following is a realistic account:

PART E


inducing “a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures the

automatic functioning of power”,115 Ryan Goodman writes:

52        The Constitution envisaged a transformation in the order of relations not

just between the state and the individual, but also between individuals: in a

constitutional order characterized by the Rule of Law, the constitutional

commitment to egalitarianism and an anti-discriminatory ethos permeates and

infuses        these relations.InK    S Puttaswamy v.                Union of         India115   Michel Foucault, Discipline And Punish: the Birth of the Prison, Pantheon Books (1977) at page 201.
116   Ryan Goodman, “Beyond the Enforcement Principle: Sodomy Laws, Social Norms, and Social Panoptics”,
      California Law Review, Vol. 89 (2001), at page 688.66PART E


(“Puttaswamy”)117, this Court affirmed the individual as the bearer of the

constitutional guarantee of rights. Such rights are devoid of their guarantee

when despite legal recognition, the social, economic and political context

enables an atmosphere of continued discrimination. The Constitution enjoins

upon every individual a commitment to a constitutional democracy

characterized by the principles of equality and inclusion. In a constitutional

democracy committed to the protection of individual dignity and autonomy, the

state and every individual has a duty to act in a manner that advances and

promotes the constitutional order of values.

By criminalizing consensual sexual conduct between two homosexual adults,

Section 377 has become the basis not just of prosecutions but of the

persecution of members of the affected community. Section 377 leads to the

perpetuation of a culture of silence and stigmatization. Section 377

perpetuates notions of morality which prohibit certain relationships as being

against the ‘order of nature.’ A criminal provision has sanctioned

discrimination grounded on stereotypes imposed on an entire class of persons

on grounds prohibited byArticle 15(1).This constitutes discrimination on the

grounds only of sex and violates the guarantee of non-discrimination inArticle

15(1)

117(2017)   10SCC 167PART F


53    History has been witness to a systematic stigmatization and exclusion of

those who do not conform to societal standards of what is expected of them.

Section 377 rests on deep rooted gender stereotypes. In the quest to assert

their liberties, people criminalized by the operation of the provision, challenge

not only its existence, but also a gamut of beliefs that are strongly rooted in

majoritarian standards of what is ‘normal’. In this quest, the attack on the

validity of Section 377 is a challenge to a long history of societal discrimination

and persecution of people based on their identities. They have been

subjugated to a culture of silence and into leading their lives in closeted

invisibility. There must come a time when the constitutional guarantee of

equality and inclusion will end the decades of discrimination practiced, based

on a majoritarian impulse of ascribed gender roles. That time is now.

the core of autonomy. These values are integral to the right to life underArticle 21of the Constitution. A meaningful life is a life of freedom and self-

respect and nurtured in the ability to decide the course of living. In the nine

judge Bench decision in Puttaswamy, this Court conceived of the right to

privacy as natural and inalienable. The judgment delivered on behalf of four

judges holds:

68

PART F


These opinions establish that the right to privacy is a natural right. The

judgment of four judges in Puttaswamy held that the right to sexual

orientation is an intrinsic part of the right to privacy. To define the scope of the

right, it is useful to examine the discussion on the right to sexual orientation in

judicial precedents of this Court.

55         Speaking for a two judge Bench in NALSA, Justice K S Radhakrishnan

elucidated upon the term ‘sexual orientation’ as differentiable from an

individual’s ‘gender identity’, noting that:

PART F


                   minorities face grave dangers of discrimination for the simple
                   reason that their views, beliefs or way of life do not accord
                   with the ‘mainstream’. Yet in a democratic Constitution
                   founded on the rule of law, their rights are as sacred as those
                   conferred on other citizens to protect their freedoms and
                   liberties. Sexual orientation is an essential attribute of privacy.
                   Discrimination against an individual on the basis of sexual
                   orientation is deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of
                   the individual. Equality demands that the sexual orientation of
                   each individual in society must be protected on an even
                   platform. The right to privacy and the protection of sexual
                   orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights
                   guaranteed byArticles 14, 15and21of the Constitution.”123


Rejecting the notion that the rights of the LGBT community can be construed

as illusory, the court held that the right to privacy claimed by sexual minorities

is a constitutionally entrenched right:

PART F


                 cannot be denied, even if there is a miniscule fraction of the
                 population which is affected. The majoritarian concept does
                 not apply to Constitutional rights and the Courts are often
                 called up on to take what may be categorized as a non-
                 majoritarian view, in the check and balance of power
                 envisaged under the Constitution of India. One’s sexual
                 orientation is undoubtedly an attribute of privacy…”125



With these observations by five of the nine judges in Puttaswamy, the basis

on which Koushal upheld the validity of Section 377 stands eroded and even

disapproved.

56      We must now consider the impact of Section 377 on the exercise of the

right to privacy by sexual minorities. Legislation does not exist in a vacuum.

The social ramifications of Section 377 are enormous. While facially Section

377 only criminalizes certain “acts”, and not relationships, it alters the prism

through which a member of the LGBTQ is viewed. Conduct and identity are

conflated.126 The impact of criminalising non-conforming sexual relations is

that individuals who fall outside the spectrum of heteronormative127 sexual

identity are perceived as criminals.128



57      World over, sexual minorities have struggled to find acceptance in the

heteronormative structure that is imposed by society. In her book titled

125 Puttaswamy, at para 647.

126 Supra note 116, at page 689.

127 The expression heteronormative is used to denote or relate to a world view that promotes heterosexuality as the

    normal or preferred sexual orientation.

128 Supra note 116, at page 689.

72PART F


‘Epistemology of the Closet’,129 Eve Sedgwick states that “the closet is the

defining structure for gay oppression in this century.” The closet is symbolic

of the exclusion faced by them:

129 Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Epistemology of the Closet, University of California Press (1990).
130 Supra note 65, at page 102.

131 David A. J. Richards, “Sexual Autonomy and the Constitutional Right to Privacy: A Case Study in Human Rights

    and the Unwritten Constitution”, Hastings Law Journal, Vol. 30, at page 786.
132 Ibid.

73PART F


a denial of the distinctive human capacities for sensual experience outside of

the realm of procreative sex.133



58         To deny the members of the LGBT community the full expression of the

right to sexual orientation is to deprive them of their entitlement to full

citizenship under the Constitution. The denial of the right to sexual orientation

is also a denial of the right to privacy. The application of Section 377 causes a

deprivation of the fundamental right to privacy which inheres in every citizen.

This Court is entrusted with the duty to act as a safeguard against such

violations of human rights. Justice Chelameswar, in his judgement in

Puttaswamy, held that:

59         The exercise of the natural and inalienable right to privacy entails

allowing an individual the right to a self-determined sexual orientation. Thus, it

is imperative to widen the scope of the right to privacy to incorporate a right to

‘sexual privacy’ to protect the rights of sexual minorities. Emanating from the


133   Ibid.

134   Puttaswamy, at Para 350.

74PART F


inalienable right to privacy, the right to sexual privacy must be granted the

sanctity of a natural right, and be protected under the Constitution as

fundamental to liberty and as a soulmate of dignity.



60         Citizens of a democracy cannot be compelled to have their lives pushed

into obscurity by an oppressive colonial legislation. In order to ensure to

sexual and gender minorities the fulfilment of their fundamental rights, it is

imperative to ‘confront the closet’ and, as a necessary consequence, confront

‘compulsory            heterosexuality.’135   Confronting   the   closet   would   entail

“reclaiming markers of all desires, identities and acts which challenge it.”136 It

would also entail ensuring that individuals belonging to sexual minorities,

have the freedom to fully participate in public life, breaking the invisible barrier

that heterosexuality imposes upon them. The choice of sexuality is at the core

of privacy. But equally, our constitutional jurisprudence must recognise that

the public assertion of identity founded in sexual orientation is crucial to the

exercise of freedoms.

61         In conceptualising a right to sexual privacy, it is important to consider

how the delineation of ‘public’ and ‘private’ spaces affects the lives of the

LGBTIQ community. Members of the community have argued that to base

135   Supra note 65, at page 103.

136   Ibid.

75PART F


their claims on a right to privacy is of no utility to individuals who do not

possess the privilege of a private space.137 In fact, even for individuals who

have access to private spaces the conflation of ‘private’ with home and family

may be misplaced.138 The home is often reduced to a public space as

heteronormativity within the family can force the individual to remain inside

the closet.139 Thus, even the conception of a private space for certain

individuals is utopian.140



62      Privacy creates “tiers of ‘reputable’ and ‘disreputable’ sex”, only

granting protection to acts behind closed doors.141 Thus, it is imperative that

the protection granted for consensual acts in private must also be available in

situations where sexual minorities are vulnerable in public spaces on account

of their sexuality and appearance.142 If one accepts the proposition that public

places are heteronormative, and same-sex sexual acts partially closeted,

relegating ‘homosexual‘ acts into the private sphere, would in effect reiterate

the “ambient heterosexism of the public space.”143 It must be acknowledged

that members belonging to sexual minorities are often subjected to


137 Danish Sheikh, “Queer Rights and the Puttaswamy Judgement”, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 52 (2017), at
    page 51.

138 Supra note 65, at page 101.

139 Ibid.

140 Ibid.

141 Supra note 137, at page 51.

142 Saptarshi Mandal, “‘Right To Privacy’ In Naz Foundation: A Counter-Heteronormative Critique”, NUJS Law

    Review, Vol. 2 (2009), at page 533.

143 Supra note 65, at page 100.

76PART F


harassment in public spaces.144 The right to sexual privacy, founded on the

right to autonomy of a free individual, must capture the right of persons of the

community to navigate public places on their own terms, free from state

interference.

F.I        Sexual privacy and autonomy- deconstructing the heteronormative
           framework



63         In the absence of a protected zone of privacy, individuals are forced to

conform to societal stereotypes. Puttaswamy has characterised the right to

privacy as a shield against forced homogeneity and as an essential attribute

to achieve personhood:

PART F


                 life. Privacy attaches to the person and not to the place where
                 it is associated.”145




This Court has recognized the right of an individual to break free from the

demands of society and the need to foster a plural and inclusive culture. The

judgment of four judges in Puttaswamy, for instance, held that:

64      InSantosh Singh v Union of India147, a two-judge Bench of this Court

dismissed a petition underArticle 32seeking a direction to the Central Board

of Secondary Education to include moral science as a compulsory subject in

the school syllabus in order to inculcate moral values. One of us

(Chandrachud J) underscored the importance of accepting a plurality of ideas

and tolerance of radically different views:

PART F


65      In Common Cause (A Registered Society) v. Union of India

(“Common Cause”)151, a Constitution Bench of this Court held that the right

to die with dignity is integral to the right to life recognised by the Constitution

and an individual possessing competent mental faculties is entitled to express

his or her autonomy by the issuance of an advance medical directive:

PART F


In order to understand how sexual choices are an essential attribute of

autonomy, it is useful to refer to John Rawls’ theory on social contract. Rawls’

conception of the ‘Original Position’ serves as a constructive model to

illustrate the notion of choice behind a “partial veil of ignorance.”154 Persons

behind the veil are assumed to be rational and mutually disinterested

individuals, unaware of their positions in society.155 The strategy employed by

Rawls is to focus on a category of goods which an individual would desire

irrespective of what individuals’ conception of ‘good’ might be.156 These

neutrally desirable goods are described by Rawls as ‘primary social goods’

and may be listed as rights, liberties, powers, opportunities, income, wealth,

and the constituents of self-respect.157 Rawls's conception of self-respect, as

a primary human good, is intimately connected to the idea of autonomy.158

Self-respect is founded on an individual's ability to exercise her native

capacities in a competent manner.159



66      An       individual’s        sexuality         cannot        be       put      into      boxes          or

compartmentalized; it should rather be viewed as fluid, granting the individual

the freedom to ascertain her own desires and proclivities. The self-


154 Thomas M. Jr. Scanlon, Rawls’ Theory of Justice, University of Pennsylvania Law Review (1973) at 1022.
155 Ibid at 1023.

156 Ibid at 1023.

157 Ibid at 1023.

158 Supra note 131, at page 971.

159 Ibid at page 972.

81PART F


determination of sexual orientation is an exercise of autonomy. Accepting the

role of human sexuality as an independent force in the development of

personhood is an acknowledgement of the crucial role of sexual autonomy in

the idea of a free individual.160 Such an interpretation of autonomy has

implications for the widening application of human rights to sexuality.161

Sexuality cannot be construed as something that the State has the

prerogative to legitimize only in the form of rigid, marital procreational sex.162

Sexuality must be construed as a fundamental experience through which

individuals define the meaning of their lives.163 Human sexuality cannot be

reduced to a binary formulation. Nor can it be defined narrowly in terms of its

function as a means to procreation. To confine it to closed categories would

result in denuding human liberty of its full content as a constitutional right. The

Constitution protects the fluidities of sexual experience. It leaves it to

consenting adults to find fulfilment in their relationships, in a diversity of

cultures, among plural ways of life and in infinite shades of love and longing.



F.2     A right to intimacy- celebration of sexual agency


67      By criminalising consensual acts between individuals who wish to

exercise their constitutionally-protected right to sexual orientation, the State is
160 Supra note 131, at page 1003.

161 Ibid.

162 Ibid.

163 Ibid.

82PART F


denying its citizens the right to intimacy. The right to intimacy emanates from

an individual’s prerogative to engage in sexual relations on their own terms. It

is an exercise of the individual’s sexual agency, and includes the individual’s

right to the choice of partner as well as the freedom to decide on the nature of

the relationship that the individual wishes to pursue.InShakti Vahini v. Union of India164, a three judge Bench of this Court

issued directives to prevent honour killings at the behest of Khap Panchayats

and protect persons who enter into marriages that do not have the approval of

the Panchayats. The Court recognised the right to choose a life partner as a

fundamental right underArticles 19and21of the Constitution. The learned

Chief Justice held:

164 (2018) SCC OnLine SC 275
165 Ibid, at para 44.

166 (2018) SCC OnLine SC 34383PART F


Court upheld her right to choose of a life partner as well as her autonomy in

the sphere of “intimate personal decisions.” The Chief Justice held thus:

167 Ibid, at para 54.

168 Ibid, at para 88.

169 Ibid, at para 93.

84PART F


the human propensity to experience desire must be treated with respect. In

addition to respect for relationships based on consent, it is important to foster

a society where individuals find the ability for unhindered expression of the

love that they experience towards their partner. This “institutionalized

expression to love” must be considered an important element in the full

actualisation of the ideal of self-respect.170 Social institutions must be

arranged in such a manner that individuals have the freedom to enter into

relationships untrammelled by binary of sex and gender and receive the

requisite institutional recognition to perfect their relationships.171 The law

provides the legitimacy for social institutions. In a democratic framework

governed by the rule of law, the law must be consistent with the constitutional

values of liberty, dignity and autonomy. It cannot be allowed to become a

yoke on the full expression of the human personality. By penalising sexual

conduct between consenting adults, Section 377 imposes moral notions

which are anachronistic to a constitutional order. While ostensibly penalising

‘acts’, it impacts upon the identity of the LGBT community and denies them

the benefits of a full and equal citizenship. Section 377 is based on a

stereotype about sex. Our Constitution which protects sexual orientation must




170  David A. J. Richards, “Unnatural Acts and the Constitutional Right to Privacy: A Moral Theory”, Fordham Law
    Review, Vol. 45 (1977), at pages 1130-1311.

171 Ibid at 1311.

85PART G


outlaw any law which lends the authority of the state to obstructing its

fulfilment.

G          Section 377 and the right to health

                   “Should medicine ever fulfil its great ends, it must enter into
                   the larger political and social life of our time; it must indicate
                   the barriers which obstruct the normal completion of the life
                   cycle and remove them.”

- Virchow Rudolf




68         In the evolution of its jurisprudence on the constitutional right to life

underArticle 21, this Court has consistently held that the right to life is

meaningless unless accompanied by the guarantee of certain concomitant

rights including, but not limited to, the right to health.172 The right to health is

understood to be indispensable to a life of dignity and well-being, and

includes, for instance, the right to emergency medical care and the right to the

maintenance and improvement of public health.173


It would be useful to refer to judgments of this Court which have recognised

the right to health.

172   Dipika Jain and Kimberly Rhoten, “The Heteronormative State and the Right to Health in India”, NUJS Law
      Review, Vol. 6 (2013).

173   C.E.S.C. Limited v. Subhash Chandra Bose, (1992) 1 SCC 441; Consumer Education and Research Centre v.

UOI, (1995) 3 SCC 42;Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity v. State of West Bengal, (1996) 4 SCC 37; Society
      forUnaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v. Union of India, (2012) 6 SCC 1;Devika Biswas v. Union of India &
      Ors., (2016) 10 SCC 726;Common Cause v. Union of India & Ors., (2018) 5 SCC 1.86PART G


InBandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India174, a three-judge Bench

identified the right to health within the right to life and dignity. In doing so, this

Court drew on the Directive Principles of State Policy:

174   (1984) 3 SCC 161
175   (1995) 3 SCC 4287PART GArticle 21read withArticles 39(c), 41and43of the
                  Constitution and makes the life of the workman
                  meaningful and purposeful with dignity of person. Right
                  to life includes protection of the health and strength of the
                  worker and is a minimum requirement to enable a person to
                  live with human dignity.”      (Emphasis supplied)




In a dissenting judgment inC.E.S.C. Limited v. Subhash Chandra Bose176,

K Ramaswamy Jobserved that:

176   (1992) 1 SCC 441
177   (1996) 2 SCC 68288PART G


InState of Punjab v. Ram Lubhaya Bagga178, a three-judge Bench of this

Court considered a challenge to the State of Punjab’s medical reimbursement

policy. A.P. Mishra J, speaking for the Bench, observed that:

It is well settled that right to life guaranteed underArticle 21is
                  not mere animal existence. It is a right to enjoy all faculties of
                  life. As a necessary corollary, right to life includes right to
                  healthy life.”



178   (1998) 4 SCC 117
179   (2001) 5 ALD 52289PART G


InDevika Biswas v. Union of India180, while hearing a public interest petition

concerning several deaths that had taken place due to unsanitary conditions

in sterilization camps across the country, a two judge Bench of this Court held

that:

180   (2016) 10 SCC 72690PART G


Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 (“UDHR”).Article 25of the UDHR

recognizes the right to health:

69Article 12of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and

Cultural Rights (“ICESCR”) recognizes the right of all persons to the

enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health:

PART G


Pursuant to General Comment No. 14, India is required to provide

marginalized populations, including members of the LGBTIQ community,

goods and services that are available (in sufficient quantity), accessible

(physically, geographically, economically and in a non-discriminatory manner),

acceptable (respectful of culture and medical ethics) and of quality

(scientifically and medically appropriate and of good quality).



70       As early as 1948, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) defined the

term ‘health’ broadly to mean “a state of complete physical, mental and social

well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.”182 Even today,

for a significant number of Indian citizens this standard of health remains an

elusive aspiration. Of relevance to the present case, a particular class of

citizens is denied the benefits of this constitutional enunciation of the right to

health because of their most intimate sexual choices.



71       Sexuality is a natural and precious aspect of life, an essential and

fundamental part of our humanity.183 Sexual rights are entitlements related to

sexuality and emanate from the rights to freedom, equality, privacy,

autonomy, and dignity of all people.184 For people to attain the highest


182Definitioncontained in the Preamble to the WHO Constitution (1948).
183 Sexual Rights, International Planned Parenthood Federation (2008).
184 Ibid.

92PART G


standard of health, they must also have the right to exercise choice in their

sexual lives and feel safe in expressing their sexual identity. However, for

some citizens, discrimination, stigma, fear and violence prevent them from

attaining basic sexual rights and health.

72      Individuals belonging to sexual and gender minorities experience

discrimination, stigmatization, and, in some cases, denial of care on account

of their sexual orientation and gender identity.185 However, it is important to

note that ‘sexual and gender minorities’ do not constitute a homogenous

group,       and      experiences           of     social      exclusion,         marginalization,           and

discrimination, as well as specific health needs, vary considerably.186

Nevertheless, these individuals are united by one factor - that their exclusion,

discrimination and marginalization is rooted in societal heteronormativity and

society’s pervasive bias towards gender binary and opposite-gender

relationships, which marginalizes and excludes all non-heteronormative

sexual and gender identities.187 This, in turn, has important implications for

individuals’ health-seeking behaviour, how health services are provided, and

the extent to which sexual health can be achieved.188


185  Alexandra Muller, “Health for All? Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, and the Implementation of the Right to
    Access to Health Care in South Africa”, Health and Human Rights (2016) at pages 195–208.
186 Institute of Medicine, “The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People: Building a Foundation for

    Better Understanding”, National Academies Press (2011).
187 Supra note 185, at pages 195–208.

188 Ibid.

93PART G


73         The term ‘sexual health’ was first defined in a 1975 WHO Technical

Report series as “the integration of the somatic, emotional, intellectual and

social aspects of sexual being, in ways that are positively enriching and that

enhance personality, communication and love.”189 The WHO’s current working

definition of sexual health is as follows:

PART G


74      A report entitled “Sexual Health, Human Rights and the Law”,190

published by the WHO in 2015 explores the relationship between these

concepts. The report notes that “human sexuality includes many different

forms of behaviour and expression, and that the recognition of the diversity of

sexual behaviour and expression contributes to people’s overall sense of

health and well-being.”191 It emphasizes the importance of sexual health by

stating that not only is it essential to the physical and emotional well-being of

individuals, couples and families, but it is also fundamental to the social and

economic development of communities and countries.192 The ability of

individuals to progress towards sexual health and well-being depends on

various factors, including “access to comprehensive information about

sexuality, knowledge about the risks they face and their vulnerability to the

adverse consequences of sexual activity; access to good quality sexual health

care, and an environment that affirms and promotes sexual health.”



75      The International Women’s Health Coalition has located the right to

sexual health within ‘sexual rights’, defined as follows:193

                 “Sexual rights embrace certain human rights that are already
                 recognized in national laws, international human rights
                 documents, and other consensus documents. They rest on
                 the recognition that all individuals have the right—free of


190 World Health Organisation, “Sexual Health, Human Rights and the Law” (2015).
191 Ibid.

192 Ibid.

193 International Women’s Health Coalition, “Sexual Rights are Human Rights” (2014).95PART G


                   coercion, violence, and discrimination of any kind—to the
                   highest attainable standard of sexual health; to pursue a
                   satisfying, safe, and pleasurable sexual life; to have control
                   over and decide freely, and with due regard for the rights of
                   others, on matters related to their sexuality, reproduction,
                   sexual orientation, bodily integrity, choice of partner, and
                   gender identity; and to the services, education, and
                   information, including comprehensive sexuality education,
                   necessary to do so.”



The discussion of ‘sexual rights’ (as they pertain to sexuality and sexual

orientation) within the framework of the right to health is a relatively new

phenomenon:194

                   “..Before the 1993 World Conference on Human Rights in
                   Vienna, and the subsequent 1994 International Conference
                   on Population and Development in Cairo, sexuality, sexual
                   rights, and sexual diversity had not formed part of the
                   international health and human rights discourse. These
                   newly emerged “sexual rights” were founded on the
                   principles of bodily integrity, personhood, equality, and
                   diversity.”195     (Emphasis supplied)



76         The operation of Section 377 denies consenting adults the full

realization of their right to health, as well as their sexual rights. It forces

consensual sex between adults into a realm of fear and shame, as persons

who engage in anal and oral intercourse risk criminal sanctions if they seek

health advice. This lowers the standard of health enjoyed by them and

particularly by members of sexual and gender minorities, in relation to the rest

of society.

194   Supra note 185, at pages 195–208.

195   Supra note 185, at pages 195–208.

96PART G


77         The right to health is not simply the right not to be unwell, but rather the

right to be well. It encompasses not just the absence of disease or infirmity,

but “complete physical, mental and social well being”,196 and includes both

freedoms such as the right to control one’s health and body and to be free

from interference (for instance, from non-consensual medical treatment and

experimentation), and entitlements such as the right to a system of healthcare

that gives everyone an equal opportunity to enjoy the highest attainable level

of health.

78         The jurisprudence of this Court, in recognizing the right to health and

access to medical care, demonstrates the crucial distinction between negative

and positive obligations.Article 21does not impose upon the State only

negative obligations not to act in such a way as to interfere with the right to

health. This Court also has the power to impose positive obligations upon the

State to take measures to provide adequate resources or access to treatment

facilities to secure effective enjoyment of the right to health.197



79         A study of sexuality and its relationship to the right to health in South

Africa points to several other studies that suggest a negative correlation

between sexual orientation-based discrimination and the right to health:

PART G


                 “For example, in a Canadian study, Brotman and colleagues
                 found that being open about their sexual orientation in health
                 care settings contributed to experiences of discrimination for
                 lesbian, gay, and bisexual people.”198

                 “Lane and colleagues interviewed men who have sex with
                 men in Soweto, and revealed that all men who disclosed their
                 sexual orientation at public health facilities had experienced
                 some form of discrimination. Such discrimination [‘ranging
                 from verbal abuse to denial of care’199], and also the
                 anticipation thereof, leads to delays when seeking sexual
                 health services such as HIV counseling and testing.”200



80      Alexandra Muller describes the story of two individuals who experienced

such discrimination. T, a gay man, broke both his arms while fleeing from a

group of people that attacked him because of his sexuality. At the hospital, the

staff learned about T’s sexual orientation, and pejoratively discussed it in his

presence. He also had to endure “a local prayer group that visited the ward

daily to provide spiritual support to patients” which “prayed at his bedside to

rectify his “devious” sexuality. When he requested that they leave, or that he

be transferred to another ward, the nurses did not intervene, and the prayer

group visited regularly to continue to recite their homophobic prayers. T did

not file an official complaint, fearing future ramifications in accessing care.

Following his discharge, he decided not to return for follow up appointments

and had his casts removed at another facility.201



198 Supra note 185, at pages 195–208.

199 Ibid.

200 Ibid.

201 Ibid.

98PART G


Another woman, P, who had been with her female partner for three years,

wanted to get tested for HIV. The nurse at the hospital asked certain

questions to discern potential risk behaviours. When asked why she did not

use condoms or contraception, P revealed that she did not need to on account

of her sexuality. The nurse immediately exclaimed that P was not at risk for

HIV, and that she should “go home and not waste her time any longer.” P has

not attempted to have another HIV test since.202



These examples are illustrative of a wider issue: individuals across the world

are denied access to equal healthcare on the basis of their sexual orientation.

That people are intimidated or blatantly denied healthcare access on a

discriminatory basis around the world proves that this issue is not simply an

ideological tussle playing out in classrooms and courtrooms, but an issue

detrimentally affecting individuals on the ground level and violating their rights

including the right to health.

81         The right to health is one of the major rights at stake in the struggle for

equality amongst gender and sexual minorities:203

                    “The right to physical and mental health is at conflict with
                    discriminatory policies and practices, some physicians'
                    homophobia, the lack of adequate training for health care


202   Ibid.

203   Study Guide: Sexual Orientation and Human Rights, University of Minnesota Human RIghts Library (2003).99PART G


                   personnel regarding sexual orientation issues or the general
                   assumption that patients are heterosexuals.”204



While the enumeration of the right to equal healthcare is crucial, an

individual’s sexual health is also equally significant to holistic well-being. A

healthy sex life is integral to an individual’s physical and mental health,

regardless of whom an individual is attracted to. Criminalising certain sexual

acts, thereby shunning them from the mainstream discourse, would invariably

lead to situations of unsafe sex, coercion, and a lack of sound medical advice

and sexual education, if any at all.

82         A report by the Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health and Human

Rights at Harvard School of Public Health defines the term ‘sexual health’ as

follows:

83         Laws that criminalize same-sex intercourse create social barriers to

accessing healthcare, and curb the effective prevention and treatment of


204   Ibid.

205   Center for Health and Human Rights and Open Society Foundations. “Health and Human Rights Resource Guide
      (2013).

100PART G


HIV/AIDS.206 Criminal laws are the strongest expression of the State’s power

to punish certain acts and behaviour, and it is therefore incumbent upon the

State to ensure full protection for all persons, including the specific needs of

sexual minorities. The equal protection of law mandates the state to fulfill this

constitutional obligation. Indeed, the state is duty bound to revisit its laws and

executive decisions to ensure that they do not deny equality before the law

and the equal protection of laws. That the law must not discriminate is one

aspect of equality. But there is more. The law must take affirmative steps to

achieve equal protection of law to all its citizens, irrespective of sexual

orientation.

In regard to sexuality and health, it is important to distinguish between

behaviour that is harmful to others, such as rape and coerced sex, and that

which is not, such as consensual same-sex conduct between adults, conduct

related to gender-expression such as cross-dressing, as well as seeking or

providing sexual and reproductive health information and services. The use of

criminal laws in relation to an expanding range of otherwise consensual

sexual conduct has been found to be discriminatory by international and




206   Supra note 172.

101PART G


domestic courts, often together with violations of other human rights, such as

the rights to privacy, self-determination, human dignity and health.207



G.I        Section 377 and HIV prevention efforts


84         Section 377 has a significant detrimental impact on the right to health of

those persons who are susceptible to contracting HIV – men who have sex

with men (“MSM”)208 and transgender persons.209 The Global Commission on

HIV and the Law has noted the impact of Section 377 on the right of health of

persons afflicted with or vulnerable to contracting HIV:

PART G


                solidarity that is necessary to           overcome     this global
                epidemic.”210




85      Mr Anand Grover, learned Senior Counsel in his submissions,

highlighted the vulnerability of MSM and transgender persons. According to a

study published by the Global Commission on HIV and the Law, MSM were

found to be 19 times more susceptible to be infected with HIV than other adult

men.211



86      The UN Human Rights Committee has recognized the impact of the

criminalization of homosexuality on the spread of HIV/AIDS. In Toonen v

Australia212, a homosexual man from Tasmania, where homosexual sex was

criminalized, argued that criminalization of same-sex activities between

consenting adults was an infringement of his right to privacy underArticle 17of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (“ICCPR”). The

Committee rejected the argument of the Tasmanian authorities that the law

was justified on grounds of public health and morality as it was enacted to

prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS in Tasmania. The Committee observed that:

PART G


                Criminalization of homosexual activity thus would appear to
                run counter to the implementation of effective education
                programmes in respect of the HIV/AIDS prevention.
                Secondly, the Committee notes that no link has been shown
                between the continued criminalization of homosexual activity
                and the effective control of the spread of the HIV/AIDS virus.”



In response to the Committee’s decision, a law was enacted to overcome the

Tasmanian law criminalizing homosexual sex.

87      Section 377 has had far-reaching consequences for this “key

population”, pushing them out of the public health system. MSM and

transgender persons may not approach State health care providers for fear of

being prosecuted for engaging in criminalized intercourse. Studies show that

it is the stigma attached to these individuals that contributes to increased

sexual risk behaviour and/or decreased use of HIV prevention services.213



88      The silence and secrecy that accompanies institutional discrimination

may foster conditions which encourage escalation of the incidence of

HIV/AIDS.214 The key population is stigmatized by health providers,

employers and other service providers.215 As a result, there exist serious

obstacles to effective HIV prevention and treatment as discrimination and


213 Beena Thomas, Matthew J. Mimiaga, Senthil Kumar, Soumya Swaminathan, Steven A. Safren, and Kenneth H.
    Mayer, “HIV in Indian MSM: Reasons for a concentrated epidemic & strategies for prevention”, Indian Journal
    Medical Research (2011), at pages 920–929.

214 Ibid.

215 Ibid.

104PART G


harassment can hinder access to HIV and sexual health services and

prevention programmes.216



89      An incisive article, based on extensive empirical research carried out in

various countries, has concluded that there is a demonstrable relationship

between “laws which criminalize same-sex conduct and adverse health

effects on HIV-AIDs rates as well as other health indicators for the MSM

community” due to poor access to key HIV prevention tools and outreach

programmes.217 According to a report published by the Joint United Nations

Programme on HIV/AIDS (“UNAIDS”), in Caribbean countries where same-

sex relations are criminalised, almost one in four MSMs is infected with

HIV.218 In the absence of such criminal provisions, the prevalence of HIV is

one in fifteen among MSMs.219



90      Closer to home, the UNAIDS project found that in the four years

following the judgement in Naz, there had been an increase of more than 50%

in the number of healthcare centers providing HIV services to MSM and

transgender persons in India.220 If same-sex relations remain criminalised, it is


216 Ibid.

217 Supra note 172, at page 636.

218 Supra note 210, at page 45.

219 Ibid.

220 UNAIDS, “UNAIDS Calls on India and All Countries to Repeal Laws That Criminalize Adult Consensual Same Sex

    Sexual Conduct” (2013).

105PART G


likely that HIV interventions for MSMs will continue to be inadequate, MSMs

will continue to be marginalised from health services, and the prevalence of

HIV will exacerbate.221



91      To safeguard the health of persons who are at the greatest risk of HIV

infection, it is imperative that access is granted to effective HIV prevention

and treatment services and commodities such as clean needles, syringes,

condoms and lubricants.222 A needle or a condom can only be considered a

concrete representation of the entitlements of vulnerable groups: the

fundamental human rights of dignity, autonomy and freedom from ill-

treatment, along with the right to the highest attainable standard of physical

and mental health, without regard to sexuality or legal status.223 This is the

mandate of the Directive Principles contained in Part IV of the Constitution.



92      In 2017, Parliament enacted the HIV (Prevention and Control) Act, to

provide for the prevention and control of the spread of HIV/AIDS and for the

protection of the human rights of persons affected. Parliament recognized the

importance of prevention interventions for vulnerable groups including MSMs.

Section 22 of this Act provides for protection against criminal sanctions as

well as any civil liability arising out of promoting actions or practices or “any
221 UNAIDS, “Judging the Epidemic: A Judicial Handbook on HIV, Human Rights and the Law” (2013) at page 165.
222 Supra note 210, at page 26.

223 Ibid, at page 26.

106PART G


strategy or mechanism or technique” undertaken for reducing the risk of HIV

transmission. Illustrations (a) and (b) to Section 22 read as follows:

Neither M nor N can be held criminally or civilly liable for such
            actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented
            from implementing or using the intervention.”




Persons who engage in anal or oral intercourse face significant sexual health

risks due to the operation of Section 377. Prevalence rates of HIV are high,

particularly among men who have sex with men. Discrimination, stigma and a

lack of knowledge on the part of many healthcare providers means that these

individuals often cannot and do not access the health care they need. In order

to promote sexual health and reduce HIV transmission among LGBT

individuals, it is imperative that the availability, effectiveness, and quality of

health services to the LGBT community be significantly improved.



Under our constitutional scheme, no minority group must suffer deprivation of

a constitutional right because they do not adhere to the majoritarian way of

life. By the application ofSection 377of the Indian Penal Code, MSM and

transgender persons are excluded from access to healthcare due to the107PART G


societal stigma attached to their sexual identity. Being particularly vulnerable

to contraction of HIV, this deprivation can only be described as cruel and

debilitating. The indignity suffered by the sexual minority cannot, by any

means, stand the test of constitutional validity.



G.2 Mental health


93         The     treatment        of    homosexuality           as    a     disorder      has      serious

consequences on the mental health and well-being of LGBT persons. The

mental health of citizens “growing up in a culture that devalues and silences

same-sex desire” is severely impacted.224 Global psychiatric expert Dinesh

Bhugra has emphasised that radical solutions are needed to combat the high

levels of mental illness among the LGBT population stating there is a “clear

correlation between political and social environments” and how persecutory

laws against LGBT individuals are leading to greater levels of depression,

anxiety, self-harm, and suicide. Even in Britain, gay people are at greater risk

of a range of mental health problems, and, it is believed, are more likely to

take their own lives.

“A number of studies this year have highlighted the
                   disproportionate levels of mental illness among LGBT people.
                   In Britain, one of the world's most legally equal countries for
                   this community, research in the last few months has revealed
                   that LGBT people are nearly twice as likely to have

224   Ketki Ranade, “Process of Sexual Identity Development for Young People with Same Sex Desires: Experiences
      of Exclusion”, Psychological Foundations - The Journal (2008).108PART G


                    attempted suicide or harmed themselves, gay men are more
                    than twice as likely to have a mental illness than
                    heterosexual men, and 4 in 5 transgender people have
                    suffered depression in the last five years.”225
                    (Emphasis supplied)



He discusses studies from various countries which indicate that in countries

where laws continue to discriminate against LGBT individuals, there are high

rates of mental illness. Similarly he states that there have been a series of

studies showing that in America, rates of psychiatric disorders have dropped

when state policies have recognised the equal rights of LGBT individuals.



94         Mr Chander Uday Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of

an intervenor, a psychiatrist, has brought to our notice how even the mental

health         sector      has      often      reflected       the     societal       prejudice        regarding

homosexuality as a pathological condition.

95         Medical and scientific authority has now established that consensual

same sex conduct is not against the order of nature and that homosexuality is

natural and a normal variant of sexuality. Parliament has provided legislative

acknowledgment of this global consensus through the enactment of theMental Healthcare Act, 2017.Section 3of the Act mandates that mental

illness is to be determined in accordance with ‘nationally’ or ‘internationally’

225   Dinesh Bhugra, globally renowned psychiatrist (article annexed in compilation provided by Mr. Chander Uday
      Singh, learned Senior Counsel).

109PART G


accepted medical standards. The International Classification of Diseases

(ICD-10) by the World Health Organisation is listed as an internationally

accepted medical standard and does not consider non-peno-vaginal sex

between consenting adults either a mental disorder or an illness.The Actthrough Section 18(2)226 and Section 21227 provides for protection against

discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.



The repercussions of prejudice, stigma and discrimination continue to impact

the psychological well-being of individuals impacted by Section 377. Mental

health professionals can take this change in the law as an opportunity to re-

examine their own views of homosexuality.

96         Counselling practices will have to focus on providing support to

homosexual clients to become comfortable with who they are and get on with

their lives, rather than motivating them for change. Instead of trying to cure

something that isn’t even a disease or illness, the counsellors have to adopt a

more progressive view that reflects the changed medical position and


226    Section 18. Right to access mental healthcare.—(1) Every person shall have a right to access mental
      healthcare and treatment from mental health services run or funded by the appropriate Government. (2) The right
      to access mental healthcare and treatment shall mean mental health services of affordable cost, of good quality,
      available in sufficient quantity, accessible geographically, without discrimination on the basis of gender, sex,
      sexual orientation, religion, culture, caste, social or political beliefs, class, disability or any other basis and
      provided in a manner that is acceptable to persons with mental illness and their families and care-givers.
227   Section 21. Right to equality and non-discrimination.—(1) Every person with mental illness shall be treated as
      equal to persons with physical illness in the provision of all healthcare which shall include the following, namely:—

(a) there shall be no discrimination on any basis including gender, sex, sexual orientation, religion, culture, caste,
      social or political beliefs, class or disability.110PART H


changing societal values. There is not only a need for special skills of

counsellors but also heightened sensitivity and understanding of LGBT lives.

The medical practice must share the responsibility to help individuals, families,

workplaces and educational and other institutions to understand sexuality

completely in order to facilitate the creation of a society free from

discrimination228 where LGBT individuals like all other citizens are treated with

equal standards of respect and value for human rights.

the State Legislatures underArticles 245and246of the Constitution.

Parliament and the State Legislatures are empowered to create offences

against laws with respect to the heads of legislation, falling within the purview

of their legislative authority. (See Entry 93 of List I and Entry 64 of List II of the

Seventh Schedule). Criminal law is a subject which falls within the Concurrent

List. Entry I of List III provides thus:

228   Vinay Chandran, “From judgement to practice: Section 377 and the medical sector”, Indian Journal of Medical
      Ethics, Vol. 4 (2009).

111PART H


The power to enact legislation in the field of criminal law has been entrusted

to Parliament and, subject to its authority, to the State Legislatures. Both

Parliament and the State Legislatures can enact laws providing for offences

arising out of legislation falling within their legislative domains. The authority

to enact law, however, is subject to the validity of the law being scrutinised on

the touchstone of constitutional safeguards. A citizen, or, as in the present

case, a community of citizens, having addressed a challenge to the validity of

a law which creates an offence, the authority to determine that question is

entrusted to the judicial branch in the exercise of the power of judicial review.

The Court will not, as it does not, in the exercise of judicial review, second

guess a value judgment made by the legislature on the need for or the

efficacy of legislation. But where a law creating an offence is found to be

offensive to fundamental rights, such a law is not immune to challenge. The

constitutional authority which is entrusted to the legislatures to create offences

is subject to the mandate of a written Constitution. Where the validity of the

law is called into question, judicial review will extend to scrutinising whether

the law is manifestly arbitrary in its encroachment on fundamental liberties. If

a law discriminates against a group or a community of citizens by denying

them full and equal participation as citizens, in the rights and liberties granted

by the Constitution, it would be for the Court to adjudicate upon validity of

such a law.

upon States to protect all individuals from violations of their human rights,

including on the basis of their sexual orientation.229 Nevertheless, laws

criminalizing same-sex relations between consenting adults remain on the

statute books in more than seventy countries. Many of them, including so-

called “sodomy laws”, are vestiges of colonial-era legislation that prohibits

either certain types of sexual activity or any intimacy or sexual activity

between persons of the same sex.230 In some cases, the language used

refers to vague and indeterminate concepts, such as ‘crimes against the order

of nature’, ‘morality’, or ‘debauchery’.231 There is a familiar ring to it in India,

both in terms of history and text.

99         International law today has evolved towards establishing that the

criminalization of consensual sexual acts between same-sex adults in private

contravenes the rights to equality, privacy, and freedom from discrimination.

These rights are recognised in international treaties, covenants, and


229    Dominic McGoldrick, “The Development and Status of Sexual Orientation Discrimination under International
      Human Rights Law”, Human Rights Law Review, Vol. 16 (2016).
230   UN Human Rights Council, “Discriminatory laws and practices and acts of violence against individuals based on
      their sexual orientation and gender identity” (2011).
231   UN Human Rights Council, “Promotion and Protection of all Human Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social and
      Cultural Rights, including the Right to Development” (2008).113PART I


agreements which India has ratified, including the UDHR, ICCPR, and the

ICESCR. India has a constitutional duty to honour these internationally

recognized rules and principles.232Article 51of the Constitution, which forms

part of the Directive Principles of State Policy, requires the State to endeavour

to “foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of

organised peoples with one another.”



100 The human rights treaties that India has ratified require States Parties to

guarantee the rights to equality before the law, equal protection of the law and

freedom from discrimination. For example,Article 2of the ICESCR requires

states to ensure that:

101 The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights - the body

mandated by the ICESCR to monitor States Parties’ implementation of the

treaty – has stated that “other status” inarticle 2 (2)includes sexual

orientation, and reaffirmed that “gender identity is recognized as among the




232Vishaka v State of Rajasthan, (1997) 6 SCC 241.114PART I


prohibited grounds of discrimination”, as “persons who are transgender,

transsexual or intersex often face serious human rights violations.”233



102 The prohibition against discrimination in the ICCPR is contained inArticle 26, which guarantees equality before the law:

PART I


Similarly,Article 17of the ICCPR, which India ratified on 11 December 1977,

provides that:

103 In NALSA, while dealing with the rights of transgender persons, this

Court recognized the ‘Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International

Law in Relation to Issues of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity’ – which


235   Supra note 230, at page 6.

236   Ibid.

116PART I


outline the rights that sexual minorities enjoy as human persons under the

protection of international law – and held that they should be applied as a part

of Indian law. Principle 33 provides thus:

PART J


J          Transcending borders - comparative law


105 Over the past several decades, international and domestic courts have

developed a strong body of jurisprudence against discrimination based on

sexual orientation. This section analyses the evolution of the perspective of

the law towards sexual orientation from a comparative law perspective, and

looks at how sodomy laws have been construed in various jurisdictions based

on their histories.

106 In 1967, England and Wales decriminalized same-sex intercourse

between consenting adult males in private, and in 1980, Scotland followed

suit. The law in Northern Ireland only changed in 1982 with the decision of the

ECtHR in Dudgeon v The United Kingdom (“Dudgeon”).237 The Petitioners

challenged the Offences against the Person Act, 1861, the Criminal Law

Amendment Act, 1885 and a sodomy law that made buggery and “gross

indecency” a criminal offense, irrespective of consent. Although the law did

not specifically define these terms, the Court interpreted ‘buggery’ to mean

anal intercourse by a man with a man or woman and gross indecency to mean

any act “involving sexual indecency between male persons.” Regarding acts

prohibited by these provisions, the ECtHR observed that:

PART J


                     “Although it is not homosexuality itself which is prohibited but
                     the particular acts of gross indecency between males and
                     buggery, there can be no doubt but that male homosexual
                     practices whose prohibition is the subject of the applicant’s
                     complaints come within the scope of the offences punishable
                     under the impugned legislation.”




The ECtHR concluded that Dudgeon had suffered and continued to suffer an

unjustified interference with his right to respect for his private life. Hence, the

Court struck down the laws under challenge as violative ofArticle 8of the

European Convention on Human Rights, in so far as they criminalised “private

homosexual relations between adult males capable of valid consent.” In

observing that these laws were not proportionate to their purported need, the

Court observed:

PART J


                 penalties provided for, disproportionate to the aims sought to
                 be achieved.”239



Later, in Norris v Ireland240, the Applicant challenged Ireland's criminalization

of certain homosexual acts between consenting adult men as being violative

ofArticle 8of the European Convention on Human Rights, which protected

the right to respect for private and family life. The ECtHR held that the law

violatedArticle 8, regardless of whether it was actively enforced:

107 Five years after Dudgeon, the United States Supreme Court, in

Bowers v. Hardwick (“Bowers”)242, held that “sodomy” laws had been a

significant part of American history and did not violate the Constitution. The

Supreme Court’s reasoning in Bowers is a clear departure from that of the

239 Ibid, at para 61.

241 Application No. 15070/89,16 EHRR 485.242 478 U.S. 186 (1986).

120PART J


ECtHR in Dudgeon. In Bowers, the Supreme Court declined to accept that

the question concerned the right to privacy. Instead, it stated that the issue

was about "a fundamental right upon homosexuals to engage in sodomy”,243

which was held not to be protected by the US Constitution.



Seventeen years later, the United States Supreme Court laid the constitutional

foundation for LGBT rights in the country with its judgment inLawrence v

Texas (“Lawrence”).244 In Lawrence, the Petitioner had been arrested under

a Texas statute, which prohibited same-sex persons from engaging in sexual

conduct, regardless of consent. The validity of the statute was considered.



Relying on Dudgeon, the U S Supreme Court struck down the statute as

violative of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.

Constitution. Overruling the judgment in Bowers, Justice Kennedy, writing for

the majority, upheld Justice Stevens’ dissent in Bowers – who was also part

of the majority in Lawrence – to note that:

243   Bowers, at para 190.

244   539 U.S. 558 (2003).

121PART J


                    decisions by married persons, concerning the intimacies of
                    their physical relationship, even when not intended to produce
                    offspring, are a form of “liberty” protected by the Due Process
                    Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Moreover, this
                    protection extends to intimate choices by unmarried as well
                    as married persons.”245




He also noted that the case concerned the private, personal relationships of

consenting adults, and that the laws challenged did not further any legitimate

state interest:

245   Bowers, at para 216.

122PART J


            subject homosexual persons to discrimination both in the
            public and in the private spheres.”



The Court thus struck down the Texas law banning “deviate sexual

intercourse” between persons of the same sex (and similar laws in 13 other

US states and Puerto Rico), holding that:

The law allowed police officers to investigate intimate aspects of his private

life and to detain him if they had reason to believe that he was involved in

sexual activities with his long-term partner in the privacy of their home. Mr123PART J


Toonen challenged these laws as violative ofArticle 2(1)246, Article 17247 and

Article 26248 of the ICCPR, on the ground that:

246Article 2(1):Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to respect and to ensure to all individuals within
    its territory and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in the present Covenant, without distinction of any
    kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
    birth or other status.

247Article 17:No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home or

    correspondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation.
248Article 26:All persons are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection

    of the law. In this respect, the law shall prohibit any discrimination and guarantee to all persons equal and
    effective protection against discrimination on any ground such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or
    other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
249 Toonen, at para 2.4.

250 Toonen, at para. 8.5.

124PART J


The Court concluded that the legislation was violative ofArticle 7of the

ICCPR, holding that:

251 Toonen, at para 8.2.

253 Robert Wintemute, “Same-Sex Love andIndian Penal Code§377: An Important Human Rights Issue for India”

    National University of Juridical Sciences Law Review, (2011).254 Case No. 111-97-TC (27 November 1997).125PART J


reasoning was that “this abnormal behaviour should be the object of medical

treatment ... imprisonment in jails, creates a suitable environment for the

development of this dysfunction.” The Tribunal’s line of reasoning – referring

to homosexual activity as ‘abnormal behaviour’, requiring medical treatment –

is seriously problematic.255 That assumption is unfounded in fact and is an

incorrect doctrine for a constitutional court which protects liberty and dignity.

However ultimately, the Tribunal struck down the first paragraph of Article 516

of the Penal Code, holding that:

PART J


homosexual adult men, violated their right to equality and discriminated

against them on the basis of their sexual orientation.


Justice Ackerman, concurring with the ECtHR’s observation in Norris, noted

that:

PART J


                     between consenting adults which causes no harm to anyone
                     else. This intrusion on the innermost sphere of human life
                     violates the constitutional right to privacy. The fact that the
                     offences, which lie at the heart of the discrimination, also
                     violate the rights to privacy and dignity strengthens the
                     conclusion that the discrimination against gay men is unfair.”




In its conclusion, the Court held that all persons have a right to a “sphere of

private intimacy and autonomy that allows [them] to establish and nurture

human relationships without interference from the outside community.”260



113 In 2005, the High Court of Fiji, inDhirendra Nadan Thomas McCoskar

v. State261, struck down provisions of the Fijian Penal Code, which punished

any person who permits a male person to have “carnal knowledge” of him, as

well as acts of “gross indecency” between male persons. The High Court read

down the provisions to the extent that they were inconsistent with the

Constitution of Fiji, drawing a clear distinction between consensual and non-

consensual sexual behavior:

PART J


                   of keeping sexual expression in check by protecting the
                   vulnerable     and     penalizing    the     predator.”
                   (Emphasis supplied)



In recent years, the Caribbean States of Belize and Trinidad and Tobago have

also decriminalized consensual sexual acts between adults in private. In

Caleb Orozco v. The Attorney General of Belize (“Caleb Orozco”)262,

provisions of the Belize Criminal Code which penalized “every person who

has intercourse against the order of nature with any person…” were

challenged before the Supreme Court. Commenting on the concept of dignity,

Justice Benjamin borrowed from the Canadian Supreme Court’s observations

and noted that:263

                   “Human dignity means that an individual or group feels self-
                   respect and self-worth. It is concerned with physical and
                   psychological integrity and empowerment. Human dignity is
                   harmed by unfair treatment premised upon personal
                   traits or circumstances which do not relate to the
                   individual needs, capacities or merits. It is enhanced by
                   laws which are sensitive to the needs, capacities and merits
                   of different individuals, taking into account the context
                   underlying the differences.”     (Emphasis supplied)




Relying on the judgments in Dudgeons, National Coalition, McCoskar,

Toonen, and Lawrence, the Supreme Court struck down the provision as

violative of the claimant’s constitutional rights to privacy, dignity, and equality.

Justice Benjamin held thus:

262   Claim No. 668 of 2010.

PART J


                    “However, from the perspective of legal principle, the Court
                    cannot act upon prevailing majority views or what is popularly
                    accepted as moral…There must be demonstrated that some
                    harm will be caused should the proscribed conduct be
                    rendered unregulated. No evidence has been presented as to
                    the real likelihood of such harm. The duty of the Court is to
                    apply the provisions of the Constitution.”264




114 In Jason Jones v. The Attorney General of Trinidad and Tobago

(“Jones”)265, an expatriate gay rights activist living in the United Kingdom

challenged the provisions of Trinidad and Tobago’s Sexual Offences Act,

which criminalized ‘buggery’ and ‘serious indecency’ before the High Court of

Justice at Trinidad and Tobago. The central issue before the Court was

whether the provisions were ‘saved’ underSection 6of the Constitution, which

protects laws that were in existence before the Constitution came into force

and were only marginally changed since, from being struck down for breach of

fundamental rights.

The High Court struck down the provisions as unconstitutional, observing that

the right to choose a partner and to have a family is intrinsic to an individual’s

personal autonomy and dignity:

PART J


                  unreasonable intervention by the State. In a case such as
                  this, she/he must be able to make decisions as to who she/he
                  loves, incorporates in his/her life, who she/he wishes to live
                  with and with who to make a family.”266



The High Court also held that the existence of such laws deliberately

undermined the lives of homosexuals:

PART J


115 In Leung TC William Roy v. Secretary for Justice269, the High Court

of Hong Kong considered the constitutional validity of provisions that

prescribed different ages of consent for buggery and regular sexual

intercourse. The court held that these provisions violated the petitioner’s rights

to privacy and equality:

PART J


engage in consensual sexual activity in private, and include the right to full

citizenship, the right to form unions and the right to family life.



116 Israel was one of the first countries to recognize the rights of

homosexuals against discrimination in matters of employment. In El-Al Israel

Airlines Ltd v. Jonathan Danielwitz (“El-Al Israel Airlines”)272, the Supreme

Court of Israel considered an airline company’s policy of giving discounted

tickets to their employees and a ‘companion recognized as the husband/wife

of the employee’. This benefit was also given to a partner with whom the

employee was living together like husband and wife, but not married.

However, the airline refused to give the discounted tickets to the Respondent

and his male partner.

The Supreme Court of Israel observed thus:

PART J


The Supreme Court held that giving a benefit to an employee who has a

spouse of the opposite sex and denying the same benefit to an employee

whose spouse is of the same sex amounts to discrimination based on sexual

orientation. This violated the Petitioner’s right to equality and created an

unjustifiable distinction in the context of employee benefits.



117 In Vriend v Alberta274, the appellant, a homosexual college employee,

was terminated from his job. He alleged that his employer had discriminated

against him because of his sexual orientation, but that he could not make a

complaint under Canada’s anti-discrimination statute – the Individual’sRights

Protection Act(“IRPA”) – because it did not include sexual orientation as a

protected ground. The Supreme Court of Canada held that the omission of

protection against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation was an

unjustified violation of the right to equality under the Canadian Charter of

Rights and Freedoms.

118 The Supreme Court held that the State had failed to provide a rational

justification for the omission of sexual orientation as a protected ground under

the IRPA. Commenting on the domino effect that such discriminatory

measures have on the lives of homosexuals, the Supreme Court noted thus:

PART J


                     “Perhaps most important is the psychological harm which
                     may ensue from this state of affairs. Fear of discrimination will
                     logically lead to concealment of true identity and this must be
                     harmful to personal confidence and self-esteem.
                     Compounding that effect is the implicit message conveyed by
                     the exclusion, that gays and lesbians, unlike other individuals,
                     are not worthy of protection. This is clearly an example of a
                     distinction which demeans the individual and strengthens and
                     perpetrates [sic] the view that gays and lesbians are less
                     worthy of protection as individuals in Canada’s society. The
                     potential harm to the dignity and perceived worth of gay and
                     lesbian individuals constitutes a particularly cruel form of
                     discrimination.”




The next breakthrough for LGBTQ rights came from the Supreme Court of

Nepal, in Sunil Babu Pant v. Nepal Government275. Sunil Pant – the first

openly gay Asian national leader – filed a PIL before the Supreme Court of

Nepal praying for the recognition of the rights of lesbians, gays, and third

gender persons. The Supreme Court located the rights of LGBTQ persons to

their sexuality within the right to privacy, holding that:

119 In 2015, in Oliari v Italy (“Oliari”)276, the Applicants before the ECtHR

argued that the absence of legislation in Italy permitting same-sex marriage or

any other type of civil union constituted discrimination on the basis of sexual

orientation, in violation ofArticles 8, 12, and14of the European Convention

on Human Rights. In line with its previous case law, the Court affirmed that

same-sex couples “are in need of legal recognition and protection of their

relationship.”277 The ECtHR concluded that gay couples are equally capable

of entering into stable and committed relationships in the same way as

heterosexual couples.278



120 The ECtHR examined the domestic context in Italy, and noted a clear

gap between the “social reality of the applicants”,279 who openly live their


276 [2015] ECHR 716
277 Oliari, at para 165.

278 Ibid.

279 Oliari, at para. 173.

136PART J


relationship, and the law, which fails to formally recognize same-sex

partnerships. The Court held that in the absence of any evidence of a

prevailing community interest in preventing legal recognition of same-sex

partnerships, Italian authorities “have overstepped their margin of appreciation

and failed to fulfil their positive obligation to ensure that the applicants have

available a specific legal framework providing for the recognition and

protection of their same-sex unions.”280



121 In 2013, in United States v. Windsor281, US Supreme Court considered

the constitutionality of the Defense of Marriage Act (“DOMA”) which states

that, for the purposes of federal law, the words ‘marriage’ and ‘spouse’ refer to

legal unions between one man and one woman. Windsor, who had inherited

the estate of her same-sex partner, was barred from claiming the federal

estate tax exemption for surviving spouses since her marriage was not

recognized by federal law.282 Justice Kennedy writing for the majority, held

that restricting the federal interpretation of ‘marriage’ and ‘spouse’ to apply

only to opposite-sex unions was unconstitutional under the Due Process

Clause of the Fifth Amendment:

PART J


                    operates to deprive same-sex couples of the benefits and
                    responsibilities that come with federal recognition of their
                    marriages. This is strong evidence of a law having the
                    purpose and effect of disapproval of a class recognized and
                    protected by state law. DOMA’s avowed purpose and
                    practical effect are to impose a disadvantage, a separate
                    status, and so a stigma upon all who enter into same-sex
                    marriages made lawful by the unquestioned authority of the
                    States.”




Two years later, in Obergefell v. Hodges (“Obergefell”),283 while analysing

precedent and decisions of other US courts recognizing same-sex marriage,

Justice Kennedy observed that:

122 Justice Kennedy expressed the need to go beyond the narrow holding

in Lawrence, towards a more expansive view of the rights of homosexuals:

PART J


By a 5-4 majority, the US Supreme Court ruled that the fundamental right to

marry is guaranteed to same-sex couples by the Due Process Clause and the

Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the US Constitution.

Commenting on the right to marriage, Justice Kennedy noted:

123 The recent case of Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights

Commission (“Masterpiece Cakeshop”)285 concerned a Christian baker who

was accused of violating an anti-discrimination ordinance for refusing to make

a wedding cake for a same-sex couple based on his religious beliefs. The

Colorado Civil Rights Commission (“CCRC”) decided against the baker, and,

on appeal, the Supreme Court ruled 7-2 that the CCRC violated the baker’s

rights under the First Amendment, which guarantees freedom of expression.



Writing for the majority, Justice Kennedy said the CCRC showed “hostility” to

the baker’s religious beliefs:

PART J


            “It must be concluded that the State’s interest could have
            been weighed against Phillips’ sincere religious objections in
            a way consistent with the requisite religious neutrality that
            must be strictly observed. The official expressions of hostility
            to religion in some of the commissioners’ comments—
            comments that were not disavowed at the Commission or by
            the State at any point in the proceedings that led to
            affirmance of the order—were inconsistent with what the Free
            Exercise Clause requires. The Commission’s disparate
            consideration of Phillips’ case compared to the cases of the
            other bakers suggests the same. For these reasons, the order
            must be set aside.”



The majority held that while the Constitution allows gay persons to exercise

their civil rights, “religious and philosophical objections to gay marriage are

protected views and in some instances protected forms of expression.” The

Supreme Court found merit in the baker’s First Amendment claim, noting that

his dilemma was understandable, especially given that the cause of action

arose in 2012, before the enactment of Colorado’s anti-discrimination law and

the Obergefell judgment that legalised same-sex marriage.



The court buttressed its position by noting that in several other cases, bakers

had declined to decorate cakes with messages that were derogatory towards

gay persons and the State Civil Rights Division had held that the bakers were

within their rights to have done so. According to the majority in Masterpiece

Cakeshop, the owner was similarly entitled to decline the order, and his case

should have been treated no differently.

140PART J


124 Justice Ginsburg’s dissenting opinion, which was supported by Justice

Sotomayor, distinguished the baker in Masterpiece Cakeshop from the other

three bakers. Justice Ginsburg noted that while the other bakers would have

refused the said cake decorations to all customers, Phillips refused to bake a

wedding cake (which he baked for other customers), specifically for the

couple. She observed that:

125 Masterpiece Cakeshop is also distinguishable from a similar case, Lee

v. Ashers Bakery Co. Ltd.286, which is currently on appeal to the United

Kingdom Supreme Court. In that case, a bakery in Northern Ireland offered a


286   [2015] NICty 2.

141PART J


service whereby customers could provide messages, pictures or graphics that

would be iced on a cake. Lee – a member of an LGBT organisation – ordered

a cake with the words “support gay marriage” on it. The Christian owners

refused, stating that preparing such an order would conflict with their religious

beliefs. Lee claimed that in refusing his order, the bakery discriminated

against him on grounds of sexual orientation. Both the County Court and the

Court of Appeal ruled in favour of Lee, on the ground that the respondent’s

refusal on the ground of his religious beliefs was contrary to the provisions of

the Equality Act (Sexual Orientation) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2006 and

the Fair Employment and Treatment Order 1998.

From an analysis of comparative jurisprudence from across the world, the

following principles emerge:

PART J

4. Such a law perpetrates stereotypes, lends authority of the state to societal

   stereotypes and has a chilling effect on the exercise of freedom;

5. The right to love and to a partner, to find fulfillment in a same-sex

   relationship is essential to a society which believes in freedom under a

   constitutional order based on rights;

6. Sexual orientation implicates negative and positive obligations on the state.

   It not only requires the state not to discriminate, but also calls for the state

   to recognise rights which bring true fulfillment to same-sex relationships;

   and

7. The constitutional principles which have led to decriminalization must

   continuously engage in a rights discourse to ensure that same-sex

   relationships find true fulfillment in every facet of life. The law cannot

   discriminate against same-sex relationships. It must also take positive

   steps to achieve equal protection.

The past two decades have witnessed several decisions by constitutional and

international courts, recognizing both the decriminalization of same-sex

intercourse in private, as well as broader rights recognizing sexual orientation

equality. In 1996, South Africa became the first country in the world to143PART J


constitutionally prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation.287 As on

the date of this judgment, ten countries constitutionally prohibit discrimination

on grounds of sexual orientation.288 The United Kingdom, Bolivia, Ecuador,

Fiji, and Malta specifically prohibit discrimination on the basis of gender

identity, either constitutionally or through enacted laws.289 According the

International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association, 74

countries (including India) criminalize same-sex sexual conduct, as of 2017.290

Most of these countries lie in the Sub-Saharan and Middle East region. Some

of them prescribe death penalty for homosexuality.291



126 We are aware that socio-historical contexts differ from one jurisdiction to

another and that we must therefore look at comparative law-making

allowances for them. However, the overwhelming weight of international

opinion and the dramatic increase in the pace of recognition of fundamental

rights for same-sex couples reflects a growing consensus towards sexual

orientation equality. We feel inclined to concur with the accumulated wisdom

reflected in these judgments, not to determine the meaning of the guarantees


287  Amy Raub, “Protections Of Equal Rights Across Sexual Orientation And Gender Identity: An Analysis Of 193
    National Constitutions”, Yale Journal of Law and Feminism, Vol. 28 (2017).
288 Ibid. Of these, three are in the Americas (Bolivia, Ecuador, and Mexico), four are in Europe and Central Asia

    (Malta, Portugal, Sweden, and the United Kingdom), two are in East Asia and the Pacific (Fiji and New Zealand),
    and one is in Sub-Saharan Africa (South Africa).
289 Ibid.

290 The International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans And Intersex Association, “Sexual Orientation Laws of the World”,

    (2017).

291 Ibid.

144PART K


contained within the Indian Constitution, but to provide a sound and

appreciable confirmation of our conclusions about those guarantees.



This evolution has enabled societies governed by liberal constitutional values

– such as liberty, dignity, privacy, equality and individual autonomy – to move

beyond   decriminalisation     of offences   involving   consensual same-sex

relationships. Decriminalisation is of course necessary to bury the ghosts of

morality which flourished in a radically different age and time. But

decriminalisation is a first step. The constitutional principles on which it is

based have application to a broader range of entitlements. The Indian

Constitution is based on an abiding faith in those constitutional values. In the

march of civilizations across the spectrum of a compassionate global order,

India cannot be left behind.

K     Crime, morality and the Constitution


127 The question of what qualifies as a punishable offence under the law

has played a central role in legal theory. Attempts have been made by legal

scholars and jurists alike, to define a crime. Halsbury’s Laws of England

defines a crime as “an unlawful act or default which is an offence against the145PART K


public and renders the person guilty of the act or default liable to legal

punishment.”292 As Glanville Williams observes:

PART K


                  specific in its prescription and at another time much more
                  general.”297




Early philosophers sought to define crime by distinguishing it from a civil

wrong. In his study of rhetoric, Aristotle observed that:

PART K


actions which constitute a ‘public wrong’ will be classified as a crime.302 He

characterised public wrongs as “a breach and violation of the public rights and

duties, due to the whole community, considered as a community, in its social

aggregate capacity.”303 Duff adds to the idea of public wrong by arguing that

“[w]e should interpret a ‘public’ wrong, not as a wrong that injures the public,

but as one that properly concerns the public, i.e. the polity as a whole.”304



Nozick and Becker also support the theory that crime is conduct that harms

the public. Nozick argues that the harm caused by a crime, unlike other

private law wrongs, extends beyond the immediate victim to all those who

view themselves as potential victims of the crime.305 When such an act is

done on purpose, it spreads fear in the general community, and it is due to

this additional harm to the community [of causing fear and insecurity], that

such actions are classified as crimes and pursued by the state.306 Becker

preferred to describe crime as something which disrupts social stability and

has “the potential for destructive disturbance of fundamental social

structures.”307



302  Sir William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, Book IV, Ch. 1 & 2.
303  Ibid.

304 Antony Duff and Sandra Marshall, “Criminalization and Sharing Wrongs”, Canadian Journal of Law and

    Jurisprudence, Vol. 11, (1998) at pages 7-22.

305 Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, Basic Books (1974) ,at page 65.
306 Supra note 301.

307 Lawrence C. Becker, “Criminal Attempts and the Theory of the Law of Crimes”, Philosophy & Public Affairs, Vol 3

    (1974), at page 273.

148PART K


However, Hart questioned the theory of simply defining crime as a public

wrong, for all wrongs affect society in some way or the other:

308   Supra note 294.

309   Ibid.

149PART K


According to Hart, the first three characteristics above are common to both

civil and criminal law.310 However, the key differentiating factor between

criminal and civil law, he observed, is the “community condemnation.” 311 Thus,

he attempted to define crime as:

310 Ibid.

311 Ibid.

312 Ibid.

313 Jeremy Bentham, “Offences Against One's Self” (Louis Crompton Ed.), Columbia University.150PART K


sodomy.314 According to Bentham, homosexuality, if viewed outside the

realms of morality and religion, is neutral behaviour which gives the

participants pleasure and does not cause pain to anyone else. 315 Therefore,

he concluded that such an act cannot constitute an offence, and there is “no

reason for punishing it at all.”316



130 Bentham tested sodomy laws on three main principles: (i) whether they

produce any primary mischief, i.e., direct harm to another person; (ii) whether

they produce any secondary mischief, i.e., harm to the stability and security of

society; and (iii) whether they cause any danger to society.317 He argued that

sodomy laws do not satisfy any of the above tests, and hence, should be

repealed. On the first principle of primary mischief, Bentham said:

PART K


Thus, Bentham argued that consensual homosexual acts do not harm anyone

else. Instead, they are a source of pleasure to adults who choose to engage in

them. Bentham was clear about the distinction between ‘willing’ partners and

‘unwilling’ partners, and the latter according to him, would not fall under his

defence.

Bentham’s second argument was that there was no secondary mischief,

which he described as something which may “produce any alarm in the

community.” On this, Bentham argued:

PART K


danger of encouraging others to engage in homosexual practices. However,

Bentham argues that since homosexual activities in themselves do not cause

any harm, there is no danger even if they have a domino effect on other

individuals:

PART K


greater evil.”323 Bentham stipulated four kinds of situations where it is not

utilitarian to inflict punishment:

131 John Stuart Mill, in his treatise “On Liberty,” makes a powerful case to

preclude governments from interfering in those areas of an individual’s life

which are private. Mill’s theory, which came to be called the “harm principle”,

suggests that the state can intrude into private life by way of sanction only if

harm is caused to others or if the conduct is “other-affecting.”325 In Mill’s

words:

PART K


            opinions of others, to do so would be wise, or even right…
            The only part of the conduct of any one, for which he is
            amenable to society, is that which concerns others. In the part
            which merely concerns himself, his independence is, of right,
            absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the
            individual is sovereign.” 326 (Emphasis supplied)



Mill created a dichotomy between “self-regarding” actions (those which affect

the individual himself and have no significant effect on society at large) and

“other-regarding” actions (those which affect the society).327 He was aware

that in a way, all actions of an individual are likely to affect “those nearly

connected with him and, in a minor degree, society at large.”328 However, he

argued that as long as an action does not “violate a distinct and assignable

obligation to any other person or persons”, it may not be taken out of the self-

regarding class of actions.329 Thus, Mill proposed that “all that portion of a

person’s life and conduct which affects only himself, or, if it also affects others,

only with their free, voluntary, and undeceived consent and participation”

should be free from state interference.330 He further added that the state and

society are not justified in interfering in the self-regarding sphere, merely

because they believe certain conduct to be “foolish, perverse, or wrong.”331




326 Ibid.

327 Ibid.

328 Ibid.

329 Ibid.

330 Ibid.

331 Ibid.

155PART K


Essentially, Mill created a taxonomy on types of conduct – (a) self-regarding

actions should not be the subject of sanctions either from the state or society;

(b) actions which may hurt others but do not violate any legal rights may only

be the subject of public condemnation but not state sanction; (c) only action

which violate the legal rights of others should be the subject of legal sanction

(and public condemnation).332 The harm principle thus, operated as a negative

or limiting principle, with the main objective of restricting criminal law from

penalising conduct merely on the basis of its perceived immorality or

unacceptability when the same is not harmful.333



While Mill’s theory was not propounded in relation to LGBTQ rights, his

understanding of criminal law is well-suited to argue that sodomy laws

criminalise ‘self-regarding’ actions which fall under the first category of

conduct, and should not be subjected to sanctions either by the state or the

society.

132 A jurisprudential debate on the interplay between criminal law and

morality was set off when Lord Devlin delivered the 1959 Maccabean Lecture,



332 Mark Strasser, “Lawrence, Mill, and Same Sex Relationships: On Values, Valuing and the Constitution”, Southern
    California Interdisciplinary Law Journal, Vol. 15 (2006).
333 Joseph Raz, ‘Autonomy, Toleration and the Harm Principle’, in Issues in Contemporary Legal Philosophy: The

    Influence of HLA Hart (R. Gavison ed.), Oxford University Press (1987).156PART K


titled “The Enforcement of Morals.”334 Lord Devlin’s lecture was an attack

against the Report of the Wolfenden Committee on Homosexual Offences and

Prostitution        (“Wolfenden           Report”),         which       had       recommended     the

decriminalisation of sodomy laws in England.335 The Wolfenden Committee,

headed by Sir John Wolfenden, Vice-Chancellor of Reading University, was

set up in 1954 to consider the criminalisation of homosexuality and

prostitution, in the wake of increased arrests and convictions in the UK for

homosexuality between men.336 Among those prosecuted for ‘gross

indecency’ under the Buggery Act of 1553 and Sexual Offences Act of 1967

were eminent persons like Oscar Wilde, Alan Turing and Lord Montagu of

Beaulieu.337 After conducting a three-year long inquiry, carrying out empirical

research, and interviewing three gay men, the Wolfenden Committee

released its Report in 1957.338 The Wolfenden Report recommended that:

334 Graham Hughes, “Morals and the Criminal Law”, The Yale Law Journal, Vol.71 (1962).
335 Supra note 29.

336 Ibid.

337 Ibid.

338 Ibid.

339 Supra note 29, at paras 61 and 62.

157PART K


The Wolfenden Report stated that “it is not the purpose of law to intervene in

the private lives of citizens, or to seek to enforce any particular pattern of

behaviour…”340 The Wolfenden Report acknowledged that the law and public

opinion have a close relationship with each other – the law ought to “follow

behind public opinion” so that it garners the community support, while at the

same time, the law must also fortify and lead public opinion.341 However, it

made out a strong case for divorcing morality from criminal law and stated that

- “moral conviction or instinctive feeling, however strong, is not a valid basis

for overriding the individual’s privacy and for bringing within the ambit of the

criminal law private sexual behaviour of this kind.”342 Stating that

homosexuality is not a mental illness, the Wolfenden Report clarified that

homosexuality is “a sexual propensity for persons of one’s own sex…[it] is a

state or condition, and as such does not, and cannot, come within the purview

of criminal law.”343



133 Lord Devlin, perturbed by the Wolfenden Report’s line of reasoning,

framed questions on the issue of criminal law and morality:

PART K

2. If society has the right to pass judgment, has it also the
                right to use the weapon of the law to enforce it?”344




Devlin believed that society depends upon a common morality for its stability

and existence.345 On the basis of this belief, Devlin answered the above

questions in the affirmative, stating that – society has the right to pass

judgments on all matters of morality and also the right to use law to enforce

such morality.346 Devlin reasoned that society would disintegrate if a common

morality was not observed. Therefore, society is justified in taking steps to

preserve its morality as much as it preserves the government.347 Devlin

proposed that the common morality or “collective judgment of the society”

should be ascertained taking into consideration the “reasonable man.”348

According to him, a reasonable man is an ordinary man whose judgment “may

largely be a matter of feeling.”349                 He added that if the reasonable man

believed a practice to be immoral, and held this belief honestly and

dispassionately, then for the purpose of law such practice should be

considered immoral.350




344 Sir Patrick Arthur Devlin, “The Enforcement Of Morals” Oxford University Press (1959) at page 9.
345 Supra note 334, at page 662.

346 Animesh Sharma, “Section 377: No Jurisprudential Basis.” Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 43 (2008) at

    pages 12-14.

347 Supra note 344.

348 Ibid.

349 Ibid.

350 Ibid.

159PART K


134 Countering Devlin’s theory, Hart argued that society is not held together

by a common morality, for, after all, it is not a hive mind or a monolith,

governed by a singular set of morals and principles.351 Hart rebutted Devlin’s

argument in the following way:

PART K


                 “The law of every modem state shows at a thousand points
                 the influence of both the accepted social morality and wider
                 moral ideals. These influences enter into law either abruptly
                 and avowedly through legislation, or silently and piecemeal
                 through the judicial process…The further ways in which law
                 mirrors morality are myriad, and still insufficiently studied:

PART K


principle that power should be in the hands of the majority with the utterly

different claim that the majority, with power in their hands, need respect no

limits”358:

PART K


                    “The strength of their prejudice is the measure of the
                   indulgence which should be granted to it…The legislator
                   ought to yield to the violence of a current which carries away
                   everything that obstructs it.

But ought the legislator to be a slave to the fancies of those
                   whom he governs? No. Between an imprudent opposition and
                   a servile compliance, there is a middle path, honourable and
                   safe.”361



In other words, it appears that Bentham argued that the morality of the people

ought not be ignored in creating laws but also must not become their

unchecked fount. And if prejudicial moralities arise from the people, they

should not be unthinkingly and permanently cemented into the law, but rather

addressed and conquered.

John Stuart Mill also made a strong argument against popular morality being

codified into laws. He argued that ‘disgust’ cannot be classified as harm, and

those “who consider as an injury to themselves any conduct which they have

a distaste for”, cannot dictate the actions of others merely because such

actions contradict their own beliefs or views.362 Mill believed that society is not

the right judge when dealing with the question of when to interfere in conduct




361   Ibid.

362   Supra note 325.

163PART K


that is purely personal, and that when society does interfere, “the odds are

that it interferes wrongly and in the wrong place.”363



135 Christopher R Leslie points out the dangers of letting morality creep into

law:

136 A broad analysis of criminal theory points to the general conclusion that

criminologists and legal philosophers have long been in agreement about one

basic characteristic of crime: that it should injure a third person or the society.

363 Ibid.

364 Christopher. R. Leslie, “Creating criminals: The Injuries Inflicted by “Unenforced” Sodomy Laws”, Harvard Civil
    Rights and Civil Liberties Law Review, Vol. 35 (2000).
365 Ibid, at pages 103-181.

366 Ibid.

164PART K


An element of larger public interest emerges as the crux of crime. The

conduct which Section 377 criminalises voluntary ‘carnal intercourse against

the order of nature’ with a man or woman, inter alia – pertains solely to acts

between consenting adults. Such conduct is purely private, or as Mill would

call it, “self-regarding,” and is neither capable of causing injury to someone

else nor does it pose a threat to the stability and security of society. Once the

factor of consent is established, the question of such conduct causing any

injury, does not arise.

Although Section 377 prima facie appears to criminalise certain acts or

conduct, it creates a class of criminals, consisting of individuals who engage

in consensual sexual activity. It typecasts LGBTQ individuals as sex-

offenders, categorising their consensual conduct on par with sexual offences

like rape and child molestation. Section 377 not only criminalises acts

(consensual sexual conduct between adults) which should not constitute

crime, but also stigmatises and condemns LGBTQ individuals in society.



137 We are aware of the perils of allowing morality to dictate the terms of

criminal law. If a single, homogenous morality is carved out for a society, it will

undoubtedly have the effect of hegemonizing or ‘othering’ the morality of

minorities. The LGBTQ community has been a victim of the pre-dominant165PART L




(Victorian) morality which prevailed at the time when theIndian Penal Codewas drafted and enacted. Therefore, we are inclined to observe that it is

constitutional morality, and not mainstream views about sexual morality, which

should be the driving factor in determining the validity of Section 377.

L       Constitutional morality

138 With the attainment of independence on 15 August 1947, Indians were

finally free to shape their own destiny.367 The destiny was to be shaped

through a written Constitution. Constitutions are scripts in which people

inscribe the text of their professed collective destiny. They write down who

they think they are, what they want to be, and the principles that will guide

their interacting along that path in the future.368 The Constitution of India was

burdened with the challenge of “drawing a curtain on the past”369 of social

inequality and prejudices. Those who led India to freedom established into the

Constitution the ideals and vision of a vibrant equitable society. The framing of

India’s Constitution was a medium of liberating the society by initiating the

process of establishing and promoting the shared values of liberty, equality


367 Jawaharlal Nehru, “Tryst with Destiny”, address to the Constituent Assembly of India, delivered on 14-15 August
    1947.

368 Uday S. Mehta, “Constitutionalism”, In The Oxford Companion to Politics in India (Niraja Gopal Jayal and Pratap

    Bhanu Mehta eds.), Oxford University Press (2010), at page 15.
369 Ibid, at page 16.

166PART L


and fraternity. Throughout history, socio-cultural revolts, anti-discrimination

assertions, movements, literature and leaders have worked at socializing

people away from supremacist thought and towards an egalitarian existence.

The Indian Constitution is an expression of these assertions. It was an attempt

to reverse the socializing of prejudice, discrimination, and power hegemony in

a disjointed society. All citizens were to be free from coercion or restriction by

the state, or by society privately.370 Liberty was no longer to remain the

privilege of the few. The judgment in Puttaswamy highlights the commitment

of the constitution makers, thus:

370   Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University Press (1966), at page 65.
371   Ibid, at page 63.

167PART L


transformation in the country. It represents the aspirations of its framers. The

democratic Constitution of India embodies provisions which are value-based.



140 During the framing of the Constitution, it was realized by the members

of the Constituent Assembly that there was a wide gap between constitutional

precept and reality. The draftspersons were clear that the imbibing of new

constitutional values by the population at large would take some time. Society

was not going to change overnight. Dr Ambedkar remarked in the Constituent

Assembly:

141 The values of a democracy require years of practice, effort, and

experience to make the society work with those values. Similar is the position

of   non-discrimination,     equality,    fraternity    and     secularism.   While     the

Constitution guarantees equality before the law and equal protection of the

law, it was felt that the realization of the constitutional vision requires the

existence of a commitment to that vision. Dr Ambedkar described this

commitment to be the presence of constitutional morality among the members

of the society. The conception of constitutional morality is different from that of

public or societal morality. Under a regime of public morality, the conduct of168PART L


society is determined by popular perceptions existent in society. The

continuance of certain symbols, labels, names or body shapes determine the

notions, sentiments and mental attitudes of the people towards individuals and

things.372 Constitutional morality determines the mental attitude towards

individuals and issues by the text and spirit of the Constitution. It requires that

the rights of an individual ought not to be prejudiced by popular notions of

society. It assumes that citizens would respect the vision of the framers of the

Constitution and would conduct themselves in a way which furthers that

vision. Constitutional morality reflects that the ideal of justice is an overriding

factor in the struggle for existence over any other notion of social acceptance.

It builds and protects the foundations of a democracy, without which any

nation will crack under its fissures. For this reason, constitutional morality has

to be imbibed by the citizens consistently and continuously. Society must

always bear in mind what Dr Ambedkar observed before the Constituent

Assembly:

PART L


142 In the decision inGovernment of NCT of Delhi v. Union of India373,

the Constitution Bench of this Court dealt with the constitutive elements of

constitutional morality which govern the working of a democratic system and

representative form of government. Constitutional morality was described as

founded on a “constitutional culture”, which requires the “existence of

sentiments and dedication for realizing a social transformation which the

Indian Constitution seeks to attain.” This Court held thus:

143 Constitutional morality requires in a democracy the assurance of certain

minimum rights, which are essential for free existence to every member of

society. The Preamble to the Constitution recognises these rights as “Liberty

of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship” and “Equality of status and of

opportunity.” Constitutional morality is the guarantee which seeks that all

inequality is eliminated from the social structure and each individual is


373   2018 (8) SCALE 72170PART L


assured of the means for the enforcement of the rights guaranteed.

Constitutional morality leans towards making Indian democracy vibrant by

infusing a spirit of brotherhood amongst a heterogeneous population,

belonging to different classes, races, religions, cultures, castes and sections.

Constitutional morality cannot, however, be nurtured unless, as recognised by

the Preamble, there exists fraternity, which assures and maintains the dignity

of each individual. In his famous, yet undelivered speech titled “Annihilation of

Caste” (which has been later published as a book), Dr Ambedkar described

‘fraternity’ as “primarily a mode of associated living, of conjoint communicated

experience” and “essentially an attitude of respect and reverence towards

fellow men.”374 He remarked:

374   Supra note 372, at para 14.2.

171PART L


                   enforce them… Without fraternity equality and liberty will be
                   no deeper than coats of paint.”375



144 Constitutional morality requires that all the citizens need to have a

closer look at, understand and imbibe the broad values of the Constitution,

which are based on liberty, equality and fraternity. Constitutional morality is

thus the guiding spirit to achieve the transformation which, above all, the

Constitution seeks to achieve. This acknowledgement carries a necessary

implication: the process through which a society matures and imbibes

constitutional          morality      is   gradual,            perhaps    interminably    so.   Hence,

constitutional courts are entrusted with the duty to act as external facilitators

and to be a vigilant safeguard against excesses of state power and

democratic           concentration         of   power.          This     Court,   being   the   highest

constitutional court, has the responsibility to monitor the preservation of

constitutional morality as an incident of fostering conditions for human dignity

and liberty to flourish. Popular public morality cannot affect the decisions of

this Court. Lord Neuberger (of the UK Supreme Court) has aptly observed:

PART L


                    independent body of people who do not have to worry about
                    short term popularity.”376




The flourishing of a constitutional order requires not only the institutional

leadership of constitutional courts, but also the responsive participation of the

citizenry.377 Constitutional morality is a pursuit of this responsive participation.

The Supreme Court cannot afford to denude itself of its leadership as an

institution in expounding constitutional values. Any loss of its authority will

imperil democracy itself.

145 The question of morality has been central to the concerns around

homosexuality and the rights of LGBT individuals. Opponents – including

those of the intervenors who launched a diatribe in the course of hearing –

claim that homosexuality is against popular culture and is thus unacceptable in

Indian society. While dealing with the constitutionality ofSection 377of the

Indian Penal Code, the Delhi High Court in Naz Foundation had held:

PART L


                    and not public morality… In our scheme of things,
                    constitutional morality must outweigh the argument of public
                    morality, even if it be the majoritarian view.”




The invocation of constitutional morality must be seen as an extension of Dr

Ambedkar’s formulation of social reform and constitutional transformation.

Highlighting the significance of individual rights in social transformation, he

had observed:

PART L


minority their rightful place in the constitutional scheme, but that we equally

speak of the vision of the kind of country we want to live in and of what it

means for the majority.379 The nine-judge Bench of this Court in Puttaswamy

had held in clear terms that discrimination against an individual on the basis of

sexual orientation is deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the

individual. The Bench held:

PART M


supersede any culture or tradition.

The interpretation of a right in a matter of decriminalisation and beyond must

be determined by the norms of the Constitution.



146 LGBT individuals living under the threats of conformity grounded in

cultural morality have been denied a basic human existence. They have been

stereotyped and prejudiced. Constitutional morality requires this Court not to

turn a blind eye to their right to an equal participation of citizenship and an

equal enjoyment of living. Constitutional morality requires that this Court must

act as a counter majoritarian institution which discharges the responsibility of

protecting constitutionally entrenched rights, regardless of what the majority

may believe.380 Constitutional morality must turn into a habit of citizens. By

respecting the dignity of LGBT individuals, this Court is only fulfilling the

foundational promises of our Constitution.

M             In summation : transformative constitutionalism


147 This case has required a decision on whether Section 377 of the Penal

Code fulfills constitutional standards in penalising consensual sexual conduct

between adults of the same sex. We hold and declare that in penalising such

380   Ibid.

176PART M


sexual conduct, the statutory provision violates the constitutional guarantees

of liberty and equality. It denudes members of the LGBT communities of their

constitutional right to lead fulfilling lives. In its application to adults of the

same sex engaged in consensual sexual behaviour, it violates the

constitutional guarantee of the right to life and to the equal protection of law.



148 Sexual orientation is integral to the identity of the members of the LGBT

communities. It is intrinsic to their dignity, inseparable from their autonomy

and at the heart of their privacy. Section 377 is founded on moral notions

which are an anathema to a constitutional order in which liberty must trump

over stereotypes and prevail over the mainstreaming of culture.                Our

Constitution, above all, is an essay in the acceptance of diversity. It is founded

on a vision of an inclusive society which accommodates plural ways of life.



149 The impact of Section 377 has travelled far beyond criminalising certain

acts. The presence of the provision on the statute book has reinforced

stereotypes about sexual orientation. It has lent the authority of the state to

the suppression of identities. The fear of persecution has led to the closeting

of same sex relationships. A penal provision has reinforced societal disdain.177PART M


150 Sexual and gender based minorities cannot live in fear, if the

Constitution has to have meaning for them on even terms. In its quest for

equality and the equal protection of the law, the Constitution guarantees to

them an equal citizenship. In de-criminalising such conduct, the values of the

Constitution assure to the LGBT community the ability to lead a life of freedom

from fear and to find fulfilment in intimate choices.



151 The choice of a partner, the desire for personal intimacy and the

yearning to find love and fulfilment in human relationships have a universal

appeal, straddling age and time.       In protecting consensual intimacies, the

Constitution adopts a simple principle: the state has no business to intrude

into these personal matters. Nor can societal notions of heteronormativity

regulate constitutional liberties based on sexual orientation.



152 This reference to the Constitution Bench is about the validity of Section

377 in its application to consensual sexual conduct between adults of the

same sex. The constitutional principles which we have invoked to determine

the outcome address the origins of the rights claimed and the source of their

protection. In their range and content, those principles address issues broader

than the acts which the statute penalises. Resilient and universal as they are,

these constitutional values must enure with a mark of permanence.178PART M


153 Above all, this case has had great deal to say on the dialogue about the

transformative power of the Constitution. In addressing LGBT rights, the

Constitution speaks – as well – to the rest of society. In recognising the rights

of the LGBT community, the Constitution asserts itself as a text for

governance which promotes true equality. It does so by questioning prevailing

notions about the dominance of sexes and genders. In its transformational

role, the Constitution directs our attention to resolving the polarities of sex and

binarities of gender. In dealing with these issues we confront much that

polarises our society. Our ability to survive as a free society will depend upon

whether constitutional values can prevail over the impulses of the time.



154 A hundred and fifty eight years is too long a period for the LGBT

community to suffer the indignities of denial. That it has taken sixty eight years

even after the advent of the Constitution is a sobering reminder of the

unfinished task which lies ahead. It is also a time to invoke the transformative

power of the Constitution.

155 The ability of a society to acknowledge the injustices which it has

perpetuated is a mark of its evolution. In the process of remedying wrongs

under a regime of constitutional remedies, recrimination gives way to

restitution, diatribes pave the way for dialogue and healing replaces the hate179PART M


of a community. For those who have been oppressed, justice under a regime

committed to human freedom, has the power to transform lives. In addressing

the causes of oppression and injustice, society transforms itself. The

Constitution has within it the ability to produce a social catharsis. The

importance of this case lies in telling us that reverberations of how we address

social conflict in our times will travel far beyond the narrow alleys in which

they are explored.

156 We hold and declare that:

and180PART M

(v)   The decision in Koushal stands overruled.

Acknowledgment

Before concluding, I acknowledge the efforts of counsel for the petitioners and

intervenors who appeared in this case – Mr Mukul Rohatgi, Mr Arvind Datar,

Mr Ashok Desai, Mr Anand Grover, Mr Shyam Divan, Mr CU Singh and Mr

Krishnan Venugopal, Senior Counsel; and Mr Saurabh Kirpal, Dr Menaka

Guruswamy and Ms Arundhati Katju, and Ms Jayna Kothari, learned Counsel.

Their erudition has enabled us to absorb, as we reflected and wrote. Mr

Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General appeared for the Union of

India. We acknowledge the assistance rendered by the counsel for the

intervenors who opposed the petitioners.

…….....….............................................J
                                        [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




New Delhi;

September 06, 2018.

1. I have had the advantage of reading the opinions prepared by

  the Hon’ble Chief Justice, and my brother Judges Justice1Nariman and Justice Chandrachud. The Judgments have dealt

      in-depth with the various issues that are required to be

      examined by this Bench, to answer the reference.

2. The present batch of Writ Petitions have been filed to challenge

      the constitutional validity ofSection 377of the Indian Penal

      Code, 1860 (“IPC”) on the specific ground that it criminalises

      consensual         sexual    intercourse       between   adult     persons

      belonging to the same sex in private.

3. The issue as to whether the decision inSuresh Kumar Koushal

      & Anr. v. Naz Foundation & Ors.1requires re-consideration was

      referred to the Constitution Bench vide Order dated 8th

      January, 2018.

4. The       Petitioners      have    inter   alia    submitted   that    sexual

      expression and intimacy between consenting adults of the

      same sex in private ought to receive protection under Part III of

      the Constitution, as sexuality lies at the core of a human

      being’s        innate   identity.   Section     377   inasmuch      as    it

      criminalises       consensual relationships between same                 sex

      couples is violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed byArticles 21, 19and14, in Part III of the Constitution.


1   (2014) 1 SCC 12The principal contentions raised by the Petitioners during

  the course of hearing are:

However, if the Court is to decide and examine any issue

     other than the Constitutional validity of Section 377, or

     construe any other right in favour of the LGBT community, the

     Union of India would like to file a detailed Affidavit as that

     would       have      far-reaching        and     wide      ramifications,        not

     contemplated by the reference.

6. LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND

      6.1. The legal treatises Fleta and Britton, which date back to

              1290 and 1300 respectively, documented prevailing laws

              in England at the time. These treatises made references

              to sodomy as a crime.2

      6.2. The Buggery Act, 1533 was re-enacted in 1563 during

              the regime of Queen Elizabeth I, which penalized acts of

              sodomy by hanging.

In 1861, death penalty for buggery was abolished in

              England and Wales. However, it remained a crime “not to

              be mentioned by Christians”.

6.3. The 1861 Act became the charter for enactments framed

              in the colonies of Great Britain.

2   John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality: Gay People in Western
     Europe from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Fourteenth Century (University of
     Chicago Press, 1980), at p. 29246.4. The Marginal Note of Section 377, refers to “Unnatural

              Offences”. Section 377 reads as under:

“377.       Unnatural     offences.—       Whoever
                   voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the
                   order of nature with any man, woman or animal,
                   shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
                   with imprisonment of either description for a term
                   which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
                   liable to fine.

Explanation.—Penetration       is   sufficient   to
                   constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to the
                   offence described in this section.”
                                                             (emphasis supplied)
      6.5. Section 377 does not define “carnal intercourse against

              the order of nature”. Even though the provision is

              facially neutral, the Petitioners submit that the thrust of

              this provision has been to target the LGBT community in

              light of the colonial history of anti-sodomy laws, and

              penalise what was perceived to be ‘deviant’ or ‘perverse’

              sexual behaviour.

7. In the early 20th century, there were many psychiatric theories

      which regarded homosexuality as a form of psychopathology or

      developmental          arrest.3       It       was     believed     that        normal

      development         resulted      in a         child   growing up          to      be   a

      heterosexual adult, and that homosexuality was but a state of


3   Report of the Committee on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution, 1957, at para 30.5arrested development.4 Homosexuality was treated as a

      disorder or mental illness, which was meted out with social

      ostracism and revulsion.

8. Towards the end of the 20th century, this notion began to

      change, and the earlier theories gave way to a more

      enlightened perspective that characterized homosexuality as a

      normal and natural variant of human sexuality. Scientific

      studies indicated that human sexuality is complex and

      inherent.5

         Kurt     Hiller     in   his    speech       delivered      at    the    Second

      International Congress for Sexual Reform held at Copenhagen

      in 19286, stated:

9. In 1957, the United Kingdom published the Wolfenden

  Committee Report (supra) which recognised how the anti-

  sodomy laws had created an atmosphere for blackmail,

  harassment and violence against homosexuals. An extract of

  the findings of this Committee reads as under:

10. The trend of decriminalizing anti-sodomy laws world over

  has gained currency during the past few decades since such

  laws have been recognised to be violative of human rights. In72017, the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and

    Intersex Association noted in its Annual State Sponsored

    Homophobia Report7 that 124 countries no longer penalise

    homosexuality. The change in laws in these countries was

    given effect to, either through legislative amendments to the

    statutory enactments, or by way of court judgments.

      Relationships         between       same-sex       couples       have     been

    increasingly accorded protection by States across the world. As

    per the aforesaid Report, a total of 24 countries now allow

    same-sex      couples      to   marry, while 28            countries      legally

    recognise partnerships between same-sex couples. Several

    countries have enacted enabling legislations which protect

    LGBT persons from discrimination, and allow them to adopt

    children.8 For instance, the United Kingdom now outlaws

    discrimination in employment, education, social protection

    and housing on the ground of sexual orientation. Marriage

    between same-sex couples have been recognised in England

    and Wales.

7  Aengus Carroll And Lucas Ramón Mendos, Ilga Annual State Sponsored Homophobia
Report 2017: A World Survey Of Sexual Orientation Laws: Criminalisation, Protection And
Recognition (12th Edition, 2017), at pp. 26-36
8 Id8The British Prime Minister Theresa May in her speech at the

     Commonwealth        Joint    Forum      on        April   17,   2018   urged

     Commonwealth Nations to overhaul “outdated” anti-gay laws,

     and expressed regret regarding Britain’s role in introducing

     such laws.9 The relevant excerpt of her speech is extracted

     hereinbelow:

9  Theresa May’s Speech at the Commonwealth Joint Forum Plenary available at
 https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-speaks-at-the-commonwealth-joint-forum-
 plenary-17-april-20189to ten years. Section 377 applies irrespective of gender,

              age, or consent.

12.2. The expression ‘carnal intercourse’ used in Section 377

              is distinct from ‘sexual intercourse’ which appears inSections 375and497of the IPC. The phrase “carnal

              intercourse against the order of nature” is not defined by

              Section 377, or in the Code.

12.3. The term ‘carnal’ has been the subject matter of judicial

              interpretation in various decisions. According to the New

              International Webster’s Comprehensive Dictionary of the

              English Language10, ‘carnal’ means:

The Lahore High Court in Khandu v. Emperor12 was

              dealing with a case wherein the accused had penetrated

              the nostril of a bullock with his penis. The Court, while

              relying on the decision of the Sindh High Court in Khanu

              v. Emperor (supra) held that the acts of the accused

              constituted coitus per os, were punishable under Section

377.

                In Lohana Vasantlal Devchand & Ors v. State13 the

              Gujarat High Court convicted two accused under Section

              377 read withSection 511of the IPC, on account of



11   AIR 1925 Sind 286
12   AIR 1934 Lah 261 : 1934 Cri LJ 1096
13   AIR 1968 Guj 25211having carnal intercourse per anus, and inserting the

              penis in the mouth of a young boy. It was held that:

14   (1982) 3 SCC 912v. State of Bihar(supra). These cases referred to non-

consensual sexual intercourse by coercion.

13. HOMOSEXUALITY – NOT AN ABERRATION BUT A VARIATION OF SEXUALITY

       13.1. Whilst a great deal of scientific research has examined

               possible           genetic,           hormonal,            developmental,

               psychological, social and cultural influences on sexual

               orientation, no findings have conclusively linked sexual

               orientation to any one particular factor or factors. It is

               believed that one’s sexuality is the result of a complex

               interplay between nature and nurture.

Sexual orientation is an innate attribute of one’s

               identity, and cannot be altered. Sexual orientation is not

               a matter of choice. It manifests in early adolescence.

               Homosexuality is a natural variant of human sexuality.

                  The U.S. Supreme Court in Lawrence et al. v. Texas15

               relied upon the Brief of the Amici Curiae16 which stated:

The result of this study became the widely
                 popularized Kinsey Scale of Sexuality. This scales
                 rates all individuals on a spectrum of sexuality,
                 ranging from 100% heterosexual to 100%
                 homosexual…”
                                              (emphasis supplied)

     13.3. The American Psychiatric Association in December 1973

            removed        ‘homosexuality’         from     the     Diagnostic       and

            Statistical     Manual        of     Psychological      Disorders,       and

            opined that the manifestation of sexual attraction

            towards persons of the opposite sex, or same sex, is a

            natural condition.18

     13.4. The World Health Organization removed homosexuality

            from     the     list    of    diseases       in      the   International

            Classification of Diseases in the publication of ICD-10 in

            1992.19




18 Jack Drescher, Out of DSM: Depathologizing Homosexuality, 5(4) Behavioral Sciences
(2015), at p. 565
19 The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and

   diagnostic guidelines, World Health Organization, Geneva (1992) available at
   http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/bluebook.pdf1513.5. In India, the Indian Psychiatric Society has also opined

             that sexual orientation is not a psychiatric disorder.20 It

             was noted that:

14.1. One of the main contentions raised by the Petitioners to

             challenge the Constitutional validity of Section 377 is

             founded onArticle 14of the Constitution.Article 14enshrines the principle of equality as a fundamental

             right, and mandates that the State shall not deny to any

20   Indian Psychiatry Society: "Position statement on Homosexuality"

14.3. Section 377 operates in a vastly different manner for two

     classes of persons based on their “sexual orientation” i.e.

     the LGBT persons and heterosexual persons. Section 377

     penalises all forms of non penile-vaginal intercourse. In

     effect, voluntary consensual relationships between LGBT

     persons are criminalised in totality.

17The import and effect of Section 377 is that while a

             consensual heterosexual relationship is permissible, a

             consensual       relationship    between    LGBT      persons   is

             considered to be ‘carnal’, and against the order of nature.

Section 377 creates an artificial dichotomy. The

             natural or innate sexual orientation of a person cannot

             be a ground for discrimination. Where a legislation

             discriminates on the basis of an intrinsic and core trait

             of     an   individual,   it    cannot     form   a   reasonable

             classification based on an intelligible differentia.

      14.4.InNational Legal Services Authority v. Union of India &

             Ors.21this Court granted equal protection of laws to

             transgender persons. There is therefore no justification

             to deny the same to LGBT persons.

14.5. A person’s sexual orientation is intrinsic to their being. It

             is connected with their individuality, and identity. A

             classification    which    discriminates     between     persons

             based on their innate nature, would be violative of their

             fundamental rights, and cannot withstand the test of

             constitutional morality.

21   (2014) 5 SCC 4381814.6. In contemporary civilised jurisprudence, with States

     increasingly   recognising    the   status    of   same-sex

     relationships, it would be retrograde to describe such

     relationships as being ‘perverse’, ‘deviant’, or ‘unnatural’.

14.7. Section 375 defines the offence of rape. It provides for

     penetrative acts which if performed by a man against a

     woman without her consent, or by obtaining her consent

     under duress, would amount to rape. Penetrative acts

     (after the 2013 Amendment) include anal and oral sex.

       The necessary implication which can be drawn from

     the amended provision is that if such penetrative acts

     are done with the consent of the woman they are not

     punishable under Section 375.

While Section 375 permits consensual penetrative acts

     (the definition of ‘penetration’ includes oral and anal

     sex), Section 377 makes the same acts of penetration

     punishable irrespective of consent. This creates a

     dichotomy in the law.

14.8. The proscription of a consensual sexual relationship

     under Section 377 is not founded on any known or

     rational criteria. Sexual expression and intimacy of a19consensual nature, between adults in private, cannot be

              treated as “carnal intercourse against the order of

              nature”.

14.9. Emphasising on the second part ofArticle 14which

              enjoins the State to provide equal protection of laws to all

              persons, Nariman, J. in his concurring opinion inShayara Bano v. Union of India & Ors.22elucidated on the

              doctrine of manifest arbitrariness as a facet ofArticle 14.Apart from the conventional twin-tests of classification

              discussed in the preceding paragraphs, a legislation, or

              part thereof, can also be struck down underArticle 14on

              the ground that it is manifestly arbitrary.It would be

              instructive to refer to the following passage from the

              judgment of this Court inShayara Bano v. Union of India

              & Ors.(supra):

Further, the phrase “carnal intercourse against the

         order of nature” in Section 377 as a determining

         principle in a penal provision, is too open-ended, giving

         way to the scope for misuse against members of the

         LGBT community.

Thus, apart from not satisfying the twin-test underArticle 14, Section 377 is also manifestly arbitrary, and

         hence violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution.

15. SECTION 377 IS VIOLATIVE OFARTICLE 15Article 15prohibits the State from discrimination

         against any citizen on the grounds of religion, race,

         caste, sex, or place of birth. The object of this provision

         was to guarantee protection to those citizens who had

         suffered historical disadvantage, whether it be of a

         political, social, or economic nature.

15.1. The term ‘sex’, as it occurs inArticle 15has been given

         an expansive interpretation by this Court inNational

         Legal Services Authority v. Union of India & Ors.(supra)21to include sexual identity. Paragraph 66 of the judgment

              reads thus:

The J.S. Verma Committee23 had recommended that

              ‘sex’ underArticle 15must include ‘sexual orientation’:

In this regard, the view taken by the Human Rights

              Committee of the United Nations in Nicholas Toonen v.

              Australia24 is relevant to cite, wherein the Committee

              noted that the reference to ‘sex’ inArticle 2, Paragraph 1

              andArticle 26of the International Covenant on Civil and

              Political Rights would include ‘sexual orientation’.

      15.2. In an article titled “Reading Swaraj intoArticle 15:A New

              Deal For All Minorities”25, Tarunabh Khaitan notes that

              the    underlying        commonality         between       the     grounds

              specified inArticle 15is based on the ideas of ‘immutable

              status’ and ‘fundamental choice’. He refers to the




24   Communication No. 488/1992, U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/50/D/488/1992 (1994)
25   Tarunabh Khaitan, Reading Swaraj intoArticle 15:A New Deal For All Minorities, 2 NUJS
     Law Review (2009), at p. 41923following quote by John Gardener to provide context to

              the aforesaid commonality:

26   John Gardner, On the Ground of Her Sex (uality), 18(2) Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
     (1998), at p. 167
27   Supra note 2524The Supreme Court of Canada in its decisions in the

               cases of Egan v. Canada28, and Vriend v. Alberta29,

               interpreted Section 15(1)30 of the Canadian Charter of

               Rights and Freedoms which is pari materia toArticle 15of the Indian Constitution.

Section 15(1), of the Canadian Charter likeArticle 15of our Constitution, does not include “sexual orientation”

               as       a      prohibited          ground          of       discrimination.

Notwithstanding that, the Canadian Supreme Court in

               the aforesaid decisions has held that sexual orientation

               is a “ground analogous” to the other grounds specified

               under Section 15(1). Discrimination based on any of

               these grounds has adverse impact on an individual’s

               personal        autonomy,          and      is    undermining           of    his

               personality.

28   [1995] SCC 98
29   [1998] SCC 816
30   “15. Equality before and under law and equal protection and benefit of law
       (1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal
           protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular,
           without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex,
           age or mental or physical disability…”Article 15(1), Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.25A similar conclusion can be reached in the Indian

              context as well in light of the underlying aspects of

              immutability and fundamental choice.

The LGBT community is a sexual minority which has

              suffered      from     unjustified       and    unwarranted        hostile

              discrimination, and is equally entitled to the protection

              afforded byArticle 15.

16. SECTION 377        VIOLATES THE RIGHT TO LIFE AND LIBERTY GUARANTEED

      BYARTICLE 21Article 21provides that no person shall be deprived of

              his life or personal liberty except according to the

              procedure        established        by     law.      Such      procedure

              established by law must be fair, just and reasonable.31

                The right to life and liberty affords protection to every

              citizen or non-citizen, irrespective of their identity or

              orientation, without discrimination.

16.1. RIGHT TO LIVE WITH DIGNITY

                This Court has expansively interpreted the terms “life”

              and “personal liberty” to recognise a panoply of rights


31Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India & Anr., (1978) 1 SCC 248, at paragraph 4826underArticle        21of    the   Constitution,   so   as   to

              comprehend the true scope and contours of the right to

              life underArticle 21.Article 21is “the most precious

              human right and forms the ark of all other rights” as held

              inFrancis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory

              of Delhi & Ors.,32wherein it was noted that the right to

              life could not be restricted to a mere animal existence,

              and provided for much more than only physical

              survival.33 Bhagwati J. observed as under:

32   (1981) 1 SCC 608
33   (1981) 1 SCC 608 at paragraph 727This was re-affirmed by the Constitution bench

              decision inK.S. Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India &

              Ors.34andCommon Cause (A Registered Society) v. Union

              of India & Anr.35

                Althoughdignity is an amorphous concept which is

              incapable of being defined, it is a core intrinsic value of

              every human being.Dignity is considered essential for a

              meaningful existence.36

                InNational Legal Services Authority v. Union of India &

              Ors.(supra),     this    Court     recognised      the    right    of

              transgender        persons     to    decide    their    self-identified

              gender. In the context of the legal rights of transgender

              persons, this Court held that sexual orientation and

              gender identity is an integral part of their personality.

                The relevant excerpt from Radhakrishnan, J.’s view is

              extracted hereinbelow:

“22.    …Each     person’s    self-defined   sexual
                  orientation and gender identity is integral to their
                  personality and is one of the most basic aspects of
                  self-determination, dignity and freedom…”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)

34   (2017) 10 SCC 1
35   (2018) 5 SCC 1 at paragraphs 156, 437, 438, 488 & 516
36Common Cause (A Registered Society) v. Union of India and Anr., (2018) 5 SCC 1, at
      paragraphs 437 and 43828Sexual orientation is innate to a human being. It is an

             important attribute of one’s personality and identity.

             Homosexuality and bisexuality are natural variants of

             human sexuality. LGBT persons have little or no choice

             over their sexual orientation. LGBT persons, like other

             heterosexual persons, are entitled to their privacy, and

             the right to lead a dignified existence, without fear of

             persecution. They are entitled to complete autonomy over

             the most intimate decisions relating to their personal life,

             including the choice of their partners. Such choices must

             be protected underArticle 21.The right to life and liberty

             would encompass the right to sexual autonomy, and

             freedom of expression.

The   following   excerpt   from   the   decision   of   the

             Constitutional Court of South Africa in National Coalition

             for Gay and Lesbian Equality and Anr. v. Minister of

             Justice and Ors.37 is also instructive in this regard:

37   [1998] ZACC 1529socially disconnected self. It acknowledges that
                  people live in their bodies, their communities, their
                  cultures, their places and their times. The
                  expression of sexuality requires a partner, real or
                  imagined. It is not for the state to choose or
                  arrange the choice of partner, but for the partners
                  to choose themselves.”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)

                Section 377 insofar as it curtails the personal liberty of

             LGBT persons to engage in voluntary consensual sexual

             relationships with a partner of their choice, in a safe and

             dignified environment, is violative ofArticle 21.It inhibits

             them        from       entering       and       nurturing         enduring

             relationships. As a result, LGBT individuals are forced to

             either lead a life of solitary existence without a

             companion, or lead a closeted life as “unapprehended

             felons”.38

                Section 377 criminalises the entire class of LGBT

             persons since sexual intercourse between such persons,

             is considered to be carnal and “against the order of

             nature”. Section 377 prohibits LGBT persons from

             engaging in intimate sexual relations in private.



38   According to Professor Edwin Cameron, LGBT persons are reduced to the status of
      “unapprehended felons” owing to the ever-so-present threat of prosecution.
      Edwin Cameron, Sexual Orientation and the Constitution:A TestCase for Human Rights,
      110 South African Law Journal (1993), at p. 45030The social ostracism against LGBT persons prevents

              them from partaking in all activities as full citizens, and

              in turn impedes them from realising their fullest

              potential as human beings.

On the issue of criminalisation of homosexuality, the

              dissenting opinion of Blackmun J. of the U.S. Supreme

              Court in Bowers v. Hardwick39 is instructive, which cites

              a previous decision in Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton40

              and noted as follows:

…The present case does not involve minors. It
does not involve persons who might be injured or
coerced or who are situated in relationships where
consent might not easily be refused. It does not
involve public conduct or prostitution. It does not
involve whether the government must give formal
recognition to any relationship that homosexuals
persons seek to enter. The case does involve two
adults who, with full and mutual consent from
each other, engage in sexual practices, common to
a homosexual lifestyle. The Petitioners are entitled
to respect for their private lives. The State cannot
demean their existence or control their destiny by
making their private sexual conduct a crime. The
right to liberty under the Due Process Clause gives
them the full right to engage in their conduct
without intervention of the government. It is a
promise of the Constitution that there is a realm of
personal liberty which the government may not
enter. Casey, supra at 847. The Texas statute32furthers no legitimate state interest which can
                   justify its intrusion into the personal and private
                   life of the individual.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
                Thus, Section 377 prevents LGBT persons from leading

              a dignified life as guaranteed byArticle 21.

16.2. RIGHT TO PRIVACY

                The right to privacy has now been recognised to be an

              intrinsic part of the right to life and personal liberty

              underArticle 21.41Sexual orientation is an innate part of the identity of

              LGBT persons. Sexual orientation of a person is an

              essential attribute of privacy. Its protection lies at the

              core of Fundamental Rights guaranteed byArticles 14,

              15, and21.42The right to privacy is broad-based and pervasive

              under our Constitutional scheme, and encompasses

              decisional       autonomy,         to    cover     intimate/personal




41K.S. Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors., (2017) 10 SCC 1
42   K.S. Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors., (2017) 10 SCC 1, at paragraphs 144,
     145, 479 and 64733decisions and preserves the sanctity of the private sphere

              of an individual.43

                The right to privacy is not simply the “right to be let

              alone”, and has travelled far beyond that initial concept.

              It now incorporates the ideas of spatial privacy, and

              decisional privacy or privacy of choice.44 It extends to the

              right to make fundamental personal choices, including

              those relating to intimate sexual conduct, without

              unwarranted State interference.

Section 377 affects the private sphere of the lives of

              LGBT persons. It takes away the decisional autonomy of

              LGBT persons to make choices consistent with their

              sexual orientation, which would further a dignified

              existence and a meaningful life as a full person. Section

              377 prohibits LGBT persons from expressing their sexual

              orientation and engaging in sexual conduct in private, a

              decision which inheres in the most intimate spaces of

              one’s existence.

43K.S. Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors., (2017) 10 SCC 1, at paragraph 248,
     250, 371 and 403
44K.S. Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors., (2017) 10 SCC 1, at paragraphs 248,
     249, 371 and 52134The Constitutional Court of South Africa in National

              Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality & Anr. v. Minister

              of Justice & Ors. (supra) noted as under:

45K.S. Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors., (2017) 10 SCC 1, at paragraphs 325,
     638 and 64535The theme of inclusiveness permeates through Part III

              of the Constitution. Apart from the equality code of the

              Constitution comprised inArticles 14, 15(1), 16, and

              other provisions in the form ofArticle 17 (Abolition of

              Untouchability),Article 21A (Right to Education),Article

              25 (Freedom of Conscienceand Free Profession, Practice

              and Propagation of Religion),Article 26 (Freedom to

              Manage Religious Affairs),Article 29 (Protection of

              Interest of Minorities),Article 30 (Right of Minorities to

              Establishand Administer Educational Institutions) are

              aimed at creating an inclusive society where rights are

              guaranteed to all, regardless of their status as a

              minority.

16.3. RIGHT TO HEALTH

                The right to health, and access to healthcare are also

              crucial facets of the right to life guaranteed underArticle

              21of the Constitution.46

                LGBT persons being a sexual minority have been

              subjected      to    societal     prejudice, discrimination and

46Common Cause (A Registered Society) v. Union of India & Anr., (2018) 5 SCC 1, at
      paragraph 304;C.E.S.C. Limited & Ors. v. Subhash Chandra Bose & Ors., (1992) 1 SCC
      441, at paragraph 32;Union of India v. Mool Chand Khairati Ram Trust, (2018) SCC
      OnLine SC 675, at paragraph 66; and, Centre forPublic Interest Litigation v. Union of
      India & Ors., (2013) 16 SCC 279, at paragraph 2536violence on account of their sexual orientation. Since

              Section 377 criminalises “carnal intercourse against the

              order of nature” it compels LGBT persons to lead

              closeted lives. As a consequence, LGBT persons are

              seriously disadvantaged and prejudiced when it comes to

              access to health-care facilities. This results in serious

              health      issues,     including       depression        and     suicidal

              tendencies amongst members of this community.47

                LGBT persons, and more specifically the MSM, and

              transgender persons are at a higher risk of contracting

              HIV as they lack safe spaces to engage in safe-sex

              practices. They are inhibited from seeking medical help

              for testing, treatment and supportive care on account of

              the    threat     of    being       ‘exposed’    and     the     resultant

              prosecution.48 Higher rates of prevalence of HIV-AIDS in

              MSM, who are in turn married to other people of the

              opposite sex, coupled with the difficulty in detection and



47   M.V. Lee Badgett, The Economic Cost of Stigma and the Exclusion of LGBT People: A Case
     Study       of    India,    World      Bank     Group       (2014)     available    at
     http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/527261468035379692/The-economic-
     cost-of-stigma-and-the-exclusion-of-LGBT-people-a-case-study-of-India (Last accessed
     on August 11, 2018)
48   Govindasamy Agoramoorthy and Minna J Hsu, India’s homosexual discrimination and
      health consequences, 41(4) Rev Saude Publica (2007), at pp. 567-660 available at
      http://www.scielo.br/pdf/rsp/v41n4/6380.pdf37treatment, makes them highly susceptible to contraction

and further transmission of the virus.

It is instructive to refer to the findings of the Human

Rights Committee of the United Nations in Nicholas

Toonen v. Australia (supra):

49   Supra note 16, at page 339

17. SECTION 377 VIOLATES THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION OF

       LGBT PERSONS

       17.1.Article 19(1)(a)guarantees freedom of expression to

               all citizens. However, reasonable restrictions can be

               imposed on the exercise of this right on the grounds

               specified inArticle 19(2).

LGBT persons express their sexual orientation in

               myriad ways. One such way is engagement in intimate

               sexual acts like those proscribed under Section 377.50

               Owing to the fear of harassment from law enforcement

               agencies and prosecution, LGBT persons tend to stay ‘in

               the closet’. They are forced not to disclose a central

               aspect of their personal identity i.e. their sexual

               orientation, both in their personal and professional

               spheres       to    avoid     persecution         in   society      and     the

               opprobrium            attached        to      homosexuality.           Unlike

               heterosexual persons, they are inhibited from openly

               forming and nurturing fulfilling relationships, thereby

               restricting rights of full personhood and a dignified




 50   Lawrence et al. v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003); and, National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian
      Equality & Anr. v. Minister of Justice & Ors., [1998] ZACC 1540existence. It also has an impact on their mental well-

being.

17.2.InNational Legal Services Authority v. Union of India &

                Ors.(supra), this Court noted that gender identity is an

                important aspect of personal identity and is inherent to a

                person.It was held that transgender persons have the

                right to express their self-identified gender by way of

                speech,       mannerism,         behaviour,   presentation   and

                clothing, etc.51

                   The Court also noted that like gender identity, sexual

                orientation is integral to one’s personality, and is a basic

                aspect of self-determination, dignity and freedom.52 The

                proposition that sexual orientation is integral to one’s

                personality and identity was affirmed by the Constitution

                Bench inK.S. Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India &

                Ors.53

                   Inthis regard, it is instructive to refer to the decision

                of this Court inS. Khushboo v. Kanniammal & Anr.54wherein the following observation was made in the

51   (2014)   5 SCC 438, at paragraphs 69-72
52   (2014)   5 SCC 438, at paragraph 22
53   (2017)   10 SCC 1, at paragraphs 144, 145, 647
54   (2010)   5 SCC 60041context of the phrase “decency and morality” as it occurs

         inArticle 19(2):

Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors.55 which had declared

      Section 377 insofar as it criminalised consensual sexual acts

      of adults in private to be violative ofArticles 14, 15and21of

      the Constitution.

The grounds on which the two-judge bench of this Court

      over-ruled the judgment inNaz Foundation v. Government of

      NCT of Delhi & Ors.(supra) were that:

55   (2009) 111 DRJ 1 (DB)43classification.   Section   377   merely   defines   a

                particular offence, and prescribes a punishment for

                the same.

ii.     LGBT persons constitute a “miniscule fraction” of

                the country’s population, and there have been very

                few prosecutions under this Section. Hence, it could

                not have been made a sound basis for declaring

                Section 377 to be ultra-viresArticles 14, 15, and21.iii.    It was held that merely becauseSection 377, IPC

                has been used to perpetrate harassment, blackmail

                and torture to persons belonging to the LGBT

                community, cannot be a ground for challenging the

                vires of the Section.

iv.     After noting that Section 377 was intra vires, this

                Court observed that the legislature was free to

                repeal or amend Section 377.

19. The fallacy in theJudgment of Suresh Kumar Koushal & Anr.

  v. Naz Foundation & Ors.(supra) is that:

In this context, it would be instructive to

                        refer to the decision of a Constitution Bench of

                        this Court inA.K. Roy v. Union of India56wherein

                        it was held that:

consensual relationships.

Sexual orientation is immutable, since it is

an innate feature of one’s identity, and cannot

be changed at will. The choice of LGBT persons

to enter into intimate sexual relations with

persons of the same sex is an exercise of their

personal choice, and an expression of their

autonomy and self-determination.

discriminates against them on the basis of their

      “sexual orientation” which is violative of their

      fundamental rights guaranteed byArticles 14,

      19, and21of the Constitution.

ii.   The mere fact that the LGBT persons constitute

      a “miniscule fraction” of the country’s population

      cannot be a ground to deprive them of their

      Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Part III of

      the    Constitution.   Even   though   the   LGBT

      constitute a sexual minority, members of the

      LGBT community are citizens of this country

      who are equally entitled to the enforcement of

      their Fundamental Rights guaranteed byArticles

      14, 15, 19, and21.

Fundamental Rights are guaranteed to all

      citizens alike, irrespective of whether they are a

      numerical minority. Modern democracies are

      based on the twin principles of majority rule,

      and protection of fundamental rights guaranteed

      under Part III of the Constitution. Under the

      Constitutional scheme, while the majority is47entitled to govern; the minorities like all other

       citizens are protected by the solemn guarantees

       of rights and freedoms under Part III.

The J.S. Verma Committee, in this regard, in

       paragraph 77 of its Report (supra) states that:

20. History owes an apology to the members of this community

   and their families, for the delay in providing redressal for the

   ignominy and ostracism that they have suffered through the

   centuries. The members of this community were compelled to

   live a life full of fear of reprisal and persecution. This was on

   account of the ignorance of the majority to recognise that

   homosexuality is a completely natural condition, part of a

   range of human sexuality. The mis-application of this

   provision denied them the Fundamental Right to equality

   guaranteed byArticle 14.It infringed the Fundamental Right

   to non-discrimination underArticle 15, and the Fundamental

   Right to live a life of dignity and privacy guaranteed by Article

21. The LGBT persons deserve to live a life unshackled from

   the shadow of being ‘unapprehended felons’.

21. CONCLUSION

            i.   In view of the aforesaid findings, it is declared

                 that   insofar    as   Section   377   criminalises50consensual sexual acts of adults (i.e. persons

                            above the age of 18 years who are competent to

                            consent) in private, is violative ofArticles 14, 15,

                            19, and21of the Constitution.

It is, however, clarified that such consent must

                            be free consent, which is completely voluntary

                            in nature, and devoid of any duress or coercion.

                      ii.   The declaration of the aforesaid reading down of

                            Section 377 shall not, however, lead to the re-

opening of any concluded prosecutions, but can

                            certainly be relied upon in all pending matters

                            whether they are at the trial, appellate, or

                            revisional stages.

adults, all acts of carnal intercouse against

                            minors, and acts of beastiality.

iv.       The judgment in Suresh Kumar Koushal & Anr.

v. Naz Foundation & Ors.57 is hereby overruled

                            for the reasons stated in paragraph 19.

57   (2014) 1 SCC 151The Reference is answered accordingly.

In view of the above findings, the Writ

              Petitions are allowed.

……………..……..…………………J.
                                        (Indu Malhotra)


New Delhi;

September 6, 2018.

52