--- Judgment Metadata ---
Title: Sanjay Malik Alias Sant Sevak Das vs The State Of Nct Of Dehi And Anr on 29 August, 2024
Document ID: 71266942
Source URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/71266942/
Court: Delhi High Court
Bench: No Bench Found
Date of Judgment: 29 August, 2024
Petitioner(s): Sanjay Malik Alias Sant Sevak Das
Respondent(s): The State Of Nct Of Dehi And Anr
Citations: No Citations Found

--- Judgment Content ---

Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Member Services--Sign up todayand get free trial for one month.

1.     The present application is filed seeking regular bail in FIR
                          No.216/2022 dated 06.03.2022, registered at Police Station Neb
                          Sarai for offences underSections 354/376of the Indian Penal
                          Code, 1860 ('IPC').

2.     The FIR in the present case was registered on a complaint
                          given by the prosecutrix, who is stated to be a foreign national. It
                          is alleged that on 11.10.2019, the prosecutrix had come to New
                          Delhi, India to perform the last rites of her husband. It is alleged
                          that one 'RA', stated to be the friend of the prosecutrix, hadSignature Not VerifiedDigitally Signed          given the contact number of the applicant to the prosecutrixBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.202418:59:34stating the applicant could help her perform the last rites of her
                          husband.

3.    It is alleged that on 12.10.2019, the prosecutrix called the
                          applicant to her place of residence to discuss about the process of
                          the last rites of her husband. It is alleged that the applicant, after
                          the said discussion, sexually assaulted the prosecutrix. It is
                          alleged that the prosecutrix, unable to comprehend the intention
                          of the applicant, had ignored such sexual advances on that
                          occasion. It is alleged that thereafter the applicant made an
                          itinerary to visit Prayagraj, Varanasi, and Gaya for the
                          performance of the post demise ceremonies.

4.    It is alleged that the prosecutrix, on the advice of the
                          applicant, went to Prayagraj on 31.01.2020, who allegedly was
                          already present there. It is alleged that while in Prayagraj, the
                          applicant helped the prosecutrix to get a tin hut to stay, and
                          further helped the prosecutrix with bone immersion. It is alleged
                          that thereafter, when the prosecutrix returned to her tent after the
                          bone immersion ceremony, the applicant once again sexually
                          assaulted the prosecutrix.

5.    It is alleged that thereafter the prosecutrix and the
                          applicant went to Varanasi, and on 06.02.2020, reached Gaya for
                          'Pind Daan.'

6.    It is alleged that on 07.02.2020 post the 'Pind Daan'
                          ceremony, the applicant had invited the prosecutrix to his room
                          to eat 'Prasad'. It is alleged that thereafter, the applicant
                          forcefully established sexual relations with the applicant.

7.    It is alleged that thereafter the prosecutrix and theSignature Not VerifiedDigitally Signed          applicant boarded the train for Delhi. It is alleged that theBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.202418:59:34prosecutrix, out of fear, deboarded the train at Mughal Sarai,
                          without informing the applicant. It is alleged that the prosecutrix,
                          out of shock, and trauma could not lodge a complaint at that
                          time.

8.      It is alleged that the prosecutrix called the applicant at
                          Nehru Place in mid-February, 2020 in order to get him
                          apprehended, however could not get the opportunity to inform
                          the police. It is further alleged that thereafter the applicant
                          continuously made phone calls to the prosecutrix. It is alleged
                          that between 16.02.2022 till 05.03.2022, multiple calls/video
                          calls were made by the applicant.

9.      The applicant was arrested on 06.03.2022. Chargesheet in
                          the present case was filed underSections 354/376of the IPC.

10.     The learned counsel for the applicant submits that the
                          applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case. At the
                          outset, he denies that the applicant engaged in any physical
                          relation with the prosecutrix. He submits that even for the sake of
                          argument, if it assumed that there was any physical relation at all
                          between the applicant and the prosecutrix, the same was
                          consensual. He submits that there was also a substantial delay in
                          lodging the FIR which casts a doubt on the story of the
                          prosecution.

11.     He submits that as per prosecutrix's own stand, the
                          incident allegedly took place on 04.02.2020, however, the FIR
                          itself was lodged much later on 06.03.2022. He submits that
                          there is no explanation why the prosecutrix kept mum for 2
                          years. He submits that the fact that the applicant is falselySignature Not VerifiedDigitally Signed          implicated in the present case is further evident from the fact thatBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.202418:59:34the prosecutrix demanded ₹45,000/- from the applicant on
                          27.02.2022. He submits that contrary to what the prosecutrix
                          deposed, she demanded money from the applicant with the clear
                          intention to extort money from him.

12.   He submits that the trial is not proceeding and the
                          applicant is still languishing in custody. He submits that the
                          examination of witness-'RA' is not crucial as she is only a
                          hearsay witness, and not a material witness. He submits that even
                          if the case of the prosecution is taken at the highest, even then
                          any physical liaison between the prosecutrix and the applicant, if
                          at all, was consensual, which is why the prosecutrix did not make
                          any complaint, and travelled with the applicant to Prayagraj,
                          Banaras and Gaya for the post-demise ceremonies.

13.   The learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State
                          opposes the grant of bail to the applicant stating that serious
                          allegations have been levelled against the applicant. He submits
                          that the witness-RA is a crucial witness, and is yet to be
                          examined. He submits that the applicant is an influential person,
                          and should not be released till the examination of the prosecution
                          witnesses is complete.

14.   The learned amicus curiae for the prosecutrix vehemently
                          opposes the request for grant of bail to the applicant. He submits
                          that the prosecutrix had no reason to falsely implicate the
                          applicant in the present case. He submits that the delay in lodging
                          an FIR in cases of sexual assault cannot be considered to be fatal
                          to the case of prosecution. He submits that the applicant is an
                          influential person in Gaya, which is why the prosecutrix did notSignature Not VerifiedDigitally Signed          make any complaint at that place. He submits that the prosecutrixBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.202418:59:34being in denial, lacked the courage to raise a complaint against
                          an influential person, that too, in an alien country.

15.   He submits that the applicant had forcefully established
                          sexual relations with prosecutrix. He submits that the applicant
                          had paid a sum of ₹20,000/- to the prosecutrix to deter her from
                          approaching the police. He submits that considering the gravity
                          and the nature of the alleged offence, the applicant should not be
                          enlarged on bail.

16.   On an earlier occasion, this Court vide order dated
                          14.03.2023 had dismissed the application filed by the applicant
                          seeking grant of regular bail and noted that serious allegations
                          had been made against the applicant. This Court after hearing the
                          parties at length had observed that from the applicant's own
                          stand, it appeared that he took the prosecutrix to Prayagraj,
                          Banaras and Gaya for the post-demise ceremonies.

17.   It was noted that merely because the prosecutrix had
                          assented to accompany the applicant to various holy places for
                          conducting the last rites and rituals, the same cannot ipso facto
                          imply that she had consented to any physical relations with the
                          applicant. It was observed that the crucial witness-RA, stated to
                          be a Czech National, was yet to depose. It was further observed
                          that regardless of whether the prosecutrix and the prime witness
                          were in India or abroad, the applicant's attempt to influence them
                          cannot be ruled out. In view of the said observations, this Court
                          had denied the bail to the applicant. The applicant was however
                          given liberty to apply for the same relief before the learned Trial
                          Court after the completion of deposition of all the prosecutionSignature Not VerifiedDigitally Signed          witnesses.

18.   The present application is filed on the ground that the trial
                          has not proceeded since the dismissal of the previous bail
                          application by this Court vide order dated 14.03.2023. It is
                          contended that applicant on the earlier occasion was not admitted
                          on bail since the witness 'RA' had not been examined. It is
                          contended that said witness still remains to be examined even
                          though more than one year has elapsed since the dismissal of the
                          bail application of the applicant vide order dated 14.03.2023.
                          The question, thus, is whether the delay in trial in the present
                          case merits an admission on bail to the applicant.

19.   I have heard the submissions of the parties and perused the
                          material on record. Prosecutrix also appeared through video-
                          conferencing and is heard at length.

20.   It is seen that after the dismissal of the previous bail
                          application by this Court, an application underSection 311of the
                          Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ('CrPC') was preferred by
                          the applicant, seeking recall of the prosecutrix. The learned Trial
                          Court, noting that there were some discrepancies in the date of
                          the alleged commission of offence, and to arrive at a just decision
                          of the case, allowed the application underSection 311of the
                          CrPC, and permitted further cross-examination of the prosecutrix
                          vide order dated 28.08.2023.

21.   It is seen that thereafter, an application was also preferred
                          by the applicant seeking examination of the prosecutrix through
                          video conferencing. Since no objection was given by the parties,
                          the learned Trial Court vide order dated 14.10.2023, allowed the
                          application seeking cross-examination of the victim throughSignature Not VerifiedDigitally Signed          video-conferencing. On 22.11.2023, the testimony of theBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.202418:59:34prosecutrix was recorded by video-conferencing underSection
                          311of the CrPC.

22.   On being pointedly asked, it is stated that only 2 witnesses
                          remain to be examined.

23.   It is stated that one of the two witnesses-RA resides
                          outside India. From a perusal of the record, it appears that
                          requests were made that she be allowed to join the proceedings
                          through video-conference for the purpose of recording her
                          testimony.

24.    It is seen that summons were issued to witness-RA
                          through Ministry of External Affairs, vide order dated
                          03.11.2022 by the learned Trial Court and on the process it was
                          mentioned that the said witness can give her evidence through
                          video conference by appearing in Indian Embassy on 24.02.2023.

25.   On 01.02.2023, the witness had appeared through video
                          conference and made such a request herself as well before the
                          learned Trial Court. The learned Trial Court on the said date
                          noted that as per the record, process had been sent to the witness
                          through Ministry of External Affairs vide order dated 03.11.2022
                          for recording evidence on 24.02.2023, and consequently the
                          matter was put up for prosecution evidence on 24.02.2023. As
                          the learned Presiding Officer was on a half day leave on
                          24.02.2023, the matter was fixed for 10.03.2023.

26.   On 10.03.2023, owing to the fact that the regular
                          prosecutor was on leave, no PW was present, and there was
                          bereavement in the family of the learned counsel for the
                          applicant, the matter could not be taken up.

Digitally Signed          27.   On 15.04.2023, considering the request made by witness-

RA on 01.02.2023 to appear through video conferencing, the
                          learned Trial Court, besides pursuing the process for recording
                          the statement of the said witness-RA through video conferencing,
                          had issued summons for the purpose of recording her statement
                          before the Court in consonance with the prescribed format
                          through the Ministry of External Affairs/Ministry of Home
                          Affairs as well. The report for the same however was not
                          received.

28.   Subsequently, the victim had volunteered to make the said
                          witness appear through video-conference for the purpose of
                          getting her testimony recorded. The same had been opposed by
                          the learned counsel for the applicant who submitted that the said
                          witness be summoned through Court for her deposition. The
                          learned counsel for the applicant had raised a concern that the
                          said witness being close friend of the prosecutrix, might be
                          influenced by the prosecutrix and her deposition might be
                          tutored. In view of the objections raised, the learned Trial Court
                          vide orders dated 07.12.2023 and 28.03.2024 again directed that
                          the said witness be summoned through Ministry of Home Affairs
                          in terms of the concerned guidelines. The report for the same
                          however was not received.

29.   Thereafter, the learned Trial Court noting that the
                          applicant was languishing in custody due to non-appearance of
                          the said witness and in order to expedite the trial, directed that
                          the said witness be served through electronic mode vide order
                          dated 23.07.2024.

30.   It is apparent from the aforesaid discussion that multipleSignature Not VerifiedDigitally Signed          efforts were made by the learned Trial Court to summon the saidBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.202418:59:34witness, however, she still remains to be examined. While the
                          delay in trial is unfortunate, the same has been caused by various
                          procedural anomalies, and cannot be attributed to either the
                          prosecution or the defense.

31.   It is seen that the trial is not proceeding on the ground of
                          examination of the said witness-RA. The question, thus, is
                          whether given the circumstances, the examination of the said
                          witness can be directed through video-conference as per the High
                          Court of Delhi Rules for Video Conferencing for Courts, 2021
                          (hereafter 'VC Rules').

32.   It is relevant to note that in terms of Rule 5.3.11, whenever
                          the Court allows the examination of a witness through video-
                          conferencing in a criminal case, of any person located outside the
                          country, then in such cases, before exercising its discretion, the
                          Court has to seek the consent of the accused person. The said
                          rule is reproduced as under:

33.   Further, Rule 18 of the VC Rules provides discretion toSignature Not Verifiedthis Court to relax the requirement of any rule if its applicabilityDigitally SignedBy:HARMINDER KAUR         would cause hardship on the parties. Rule 18 of the VC Rules
Signing Date:18.09.2024
18:59:34
                           reads as under:

34.   In the present case, the applicant had opposed the request
                          for examination of the said witness-RA through video-
                          conference on the ground that the said witness-RA, in the
                          presence of the victim may give a tutored testimony. However,
                          such concern would arise only if the testimony of the witness-RA
                          is carried out in the presence of the prosecutrix. Such
                          apprehensions can be dealt with by allowing the examination of
                          the witness-RA in accordance with the procedure prescribed
                          under the VC Rules.

35.   The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case ofState of
                          Maharashtra vs. Praful B Desai: 2003 (4) SCC 601 while
                          considering the question of recording of evidence through video
                          conferencing in a criminal trial observed as under:

(emphasis supplied)

36.   It is seen in the instant case that the witness is a Czech
                          National. It is further stated that the witness is a single mother
                          having two children. It is alleged that the said witness was also
                          sexually assaulted by the applicant.

37.   In the light of such circumstances, compelling the witness-
                          RA to come to India for her examination would cause undue
                          hardship and would unnecessarily burden her. It is also probable
                          that the witness-RA refuses to give her testimony altogether if
                          compelled to give her deposition demanding her physical
                          presence in Court.

38.   It is seen that the trial has also not proceeded on the
                          ground that the said witness has not been examined. Given the
                          aforesaid, this Court deems it fit to relax the requirements of
                          Rule 5.3.11 of the VC Rules.

39.   As observed by the Hon'ble Apex Court inState of
                          Maharashtra vs. Praful B Desai(supra), the applicant would be
                          in a better position to observe the demeanour of the witness, and
                          may even be able to rehear the deposition of the witness.

40.   The learned counsel for the applicant while opposing the
                          request for examination of the said witness-RA through video-
                          conference had stated that the witness may give a tutored
                          testimony in the presence of the prosecutrix. It is pertinent to
                          mention that the Hon'ble Apex Court in State of MaharashtraSignature Not Verified    vs. Praful B Desai (supra) while dealing with a similar concernDigitally SignedBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.2024   had observed as under:

(emphasis supplied)

41.   The learned Trial Court is therefore directed to proceed
                          with the examination of the witness-RA through video-
                          conferencing by allowing the presence of the witness-RA in the
                          nearest Indian Embassy, and record the evidence in accordance
                          with the VC Rules and the guidelineslaid down bythe Hon'ble
                          Apex Court inState of Maharashtra vs. Praful B Desai(supra).

42.   The learned Trial Court is directed to ensure that before
                          and during the session in which the evidence of the witness-RA
                          is recorded, the officer of the Embassy who is appointed to
                          record the testimony ensures that no other person except the
                          witness is present in the room where the testimony is to be
                          recorded. Further, the officer so deputed to record the testimony,
                          shall remain present with the said witness at all times during the
                          sessions in which the evidence is to be recorded.

43.   As regards the question of grant of bail, it is seen that
                          serious allegations have been made against the applicant
                          regarding the alleged commission of rape of a foreign national.

Merely because there has been a delay in trial, which too cannotBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.202418:59:34be attributed to either of the parties, this Court cannot appreciate
                          the merits again. Further, considering the gravity and nature of
                          the alleged offence, the same also cannot be made a ground for
                          grant of bail only because there has been a delay in trial. While it
                          is true that prolonged custody in itself may result in a fresh cause
                          of action, yet this Court cannot lose sight of the fact that one of
                          the prime witnesses-'RA' has still not been examined.

44.   This Court on an earlier occasion had declined to admit the
                          applicant on bail noting that the witness was a vulnerable
                          witness. It was noted that regardless of whether the prosecutrix
                          and the witness-RA were in India or abroad, the applicant's
                          attempt to influence or intimidate them cannot be negated. While
                          the trial has not proceeded, and the said witness remains to be
                          examined, there is no denying that the testimony of the said
                          witness is crucial to the adjudication of the case.

45.   In view of the aforesaid, this Court does not deem it fit to
                          enlarge the applicant on bail at this stage.

46.   The learned Trial Court is directed to proceed with the
                          matter expeditiously. It is however made clear that if the trial
                          does not conclude within the next 6 months, the applicant is at
                          liberty to file a fresh application seeking necessary relief before
                          this Court.

47.   The present bail application is dismissed with the aforesaid
                          observations.

AMIT MAHAJAN, J
                          AUGUST 29, 2024Signature Not VerifiedDigitally SignedBy:HARMINDER KAURSigning Date:18.09.202418:59:34