--- Judgment Metadata ---
Title: Satyajit Kumar vs The State Of Jharkhand on 2 August, 2022
Document ID: 162771706
Source URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/162771706/
Court: Supreme Court of India
Bench: Bench:B.V. Nagarathna,M.R. Shah
Date of Judgment: 2 August, 2022
Petitioner(s): Satyajit Kumar
Respondent(s): The State Of Jharkhand
Citations: No Citations Found

--- Judgment Content ---

Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Member Services--Sign up todayand get free trial for one month.

M.R. SHAH, J.

1.0. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugnedSignature Not Verifiedcommon judgment and order dated 21.09.2020 passedDigitally signed by RNatarajanDate: 2022.08.0215:45:58 ISTReason:in Writ Petition No.1387 of 2017 and other allied writPage 1 of 107petitions and connected applications, by which, the

High Court has allowed said writ petitions and has

observed, held and declared that the Notification

No.5938 and the Order No.5939 dated 14.07.2016

issued by the State of Jharkhand and Advertisement

No.21 of 2016 dated 28.12.2016 modified by the

Advertisement           No.21      of      2016   published    on

04.12.2017,        by     the    State     Government    through

Department of Personnel, Administrative Reforms and

Rajbhasha inviting application for appointment to the

posts of Trained Graduate Teacher in the Government

Secondary Schools to the extent of making 100%

reservation for the local candidates / residents of

Thirteen Scheduled Areas in the State of Jharkhand as

illegal,   ultra        vires    and       unconstitutional   and

consequently has quashed the appointments of the

Trained Graduate Teachers made pursuant to the

aforesaid advertisement, in the Scheduled Districts

relating to the local residents of those Districts, the

original respondents – candidates belonging to the

Thirteen Scheduled Districts have preferred presentPage 2 of 107appeals.

2.0. Civil Appeal No.4043 of 2022 has been preferred by

    the petitioners who were not party before the High

    Court challenging the action of the State Government

    in not appointing them. It is the case on behalf of the

    petitioners    that    the        State    Government      has

    misinterpreted the judgment and order passed by the

    High Court passed in Writ Petition No.1387 of 2017. It

    is their case that the dispute before the High Court

    was with regard to the appointment of the Trained

    Graduate Teachers and advertisement Notification

    No.21 of 2016. However, so far as petitioners are

    concerned,    according      to    them,   they   are   eligible

    applicants of the advertisement nos.1 of 2017 and 2 of

    2017   for    the   post    of     Lower   Divisional   Clerks

    (Collectorate cadre) – District Level Post Panchayat

    Secretary­ District Level Posts and Lower Divisional

    Clerks­ State Level Post, State Stenographer – State

    Level Post and in no manner concerned with the issue

    agitated before the High Court. It is the case on behalfPage 3 of 107of the petitioners that they are awaiting the final

    results with respect to the aforesaid posts and have

    also   undergone     document         verification    procedure

    carried   out   by   the     Jharkhand        Staff   Selection

    Committee in the year 2019.

2.1. Civil Appeal No.4048 of 2022 has been preferred by

    the State of Jharkhand challenging the order passed

    by the High Court dated 4.3.2022 passed in Contempt

    Case No. 109 of 2021. It is to be noted that Civil

    Appeal No.4048 of 2022 is with respect to the

    candidates belonging to the Non­Scheduled Districts

    who earlier filed writ petitions before the High Court

    and the High Court directed to issue appointments

    orders to the candidates belonging to the Non­

    Scheduled Districts. It is required to be noted that by

    the interim order passed by the High Court further

    contempt proceedings before the High Court have been

    stayed.

2.2. Civil Appeal No.4050 of 2022 has been preferred byPage 4 of 107the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Districts
     and who applied as a Trained Teacher pursuant to the
     aforesaid advertisement and who are not appointed
     after interim order passed by the High Court dated
     18.09.2019.

3.0. Facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are
     as under:

Pursuant to the said Notification, following Districts in

     the   State   of   Jharkhand             had   been    declared   as

     Scheduled Areas / Districts.

1.    Ranchi District.

2.    Lohardagga District.

3.    Gumla District.

4.    Simdega District.

5.    Latehar District.

6.    East­Singhbhum District.

Page 5 of 107

7.      West­Singhbhum District.

8.      Saraikela­ Kharsawan District.

9.      Sahebganj District.

10. Dumka District.

11. Pakur District.

12. Jamtara District.

13. Palamu District­ Rabda and Bakoriya Panchayats
    of Satbarwa Block.

14. Godda       District­     Sunderpahari        and     Boarijor
    Blocks.

(hereinafter referred to as the “Scheduled Areas”).


3.2. That    the   State   Government            issued    “Jharkhand

    Government       (Recruitment          of   Teachers   and   Non­

    Teaching Staff in Secondary Schools & their Service

    and Condition) Rules, 2015 by means of which the

    conditions / qualifications for appointment of teachers

    had been prescribed, vide Notification dated 1.3.2016.


    That pursuant to the order passed by the High Court

    in Writ Petition (PIL) No. 4806 of 2016, vide Circular

    dated 18.04.2016 the State Government prescribed

    definition of “Local Resident of Jharkhand”. As per the

    said Circular, the Local Resident of Jharkhand wouldPage 6 of 107be deemed such Indian Citizens who would fulfill any

    one condition out of the following …….

“(i).he  would have been residing within the
         geographical limits of the State of Jharkhand and
         either his own name or name of his forefather would
         have been lying recorded in Survey Khata. In the
         cases of landless, he would be identified by the
         concerning Gram Sabha which would be based on
         language, culture & traditions prevailing in the State
         of Jharkhand.

(ii)would have been residing within the geographical
         limits of the State of Jharkhand for the past 30
         years or more due to any trade, employment and
         other reasons and would have earned immovable
         property or such person has wife/husband /child
         and affirm commitment to stay in Jharkhand State.

(iii) would have been appointed & working
         officer/employee under the Government of State of
         Jharkhand / institutions being run/recognized by
         the State Government, Corporation etc.  Or has
         wife/husband /child and affirm commitment to stay
         in Jharkhand state.

(iv)Officer/employee of the Government of India,
         working in the     State of Jharkhand or have 188
         wife/husband /child and affirm      commitment to
         stay in Jharkhand state.

(v)Person appointed at any constitutional or
         statutory posts in the State of Jharkhand or have
         wife/husband /child and affirm      commitment to
         stay in Jharkhand state.

(vi) Such person who would have born in the State of
         Jharkhand and completed his whole education upto
         Matriculation or its equivalent level from the
         recognized institutions established in the state of
         Jharkhand & affirm commitment to stay in
         Jharkhand state.”


3.3. That thereafter, the State Government came out withPage 7 of 107Notification No. 5938 and Order No. 5939 dated

14.7.2016    directing     that        in   Thirteen   Scheduled

Districts of the State, the local residents of the

concerned Districts (Thirteen Scheduled Districts) only

shall be eligible to be appointed on the District Cadre

Class III and Class IV posts, for a period of ten (10)

years from the date of publication of the Notification. It

appears that said order had been issued by the

Governor of Jharkhand in exercise of powers conferred

under sub­paragraph(1) of paragraph 5 of the Fifth

Schedule of the Constitution of India. In the order

dated 14.07.2016 it is observed as under:

Pursuant     to    such      notices,           several   interlocutory

    applications / intervener applications came to be filed,

    which came to be allowed by the High Court.

Taking       into     consideration           the    question      of

    Constitutional importance involved in these matters,

    by order dated 18.09.2019 the Division Bench of the

    High Court referred the matter to be decided by the

    Larger Bench. By the same order dated 18.09.2019,

    the High Court stayed further implementation and

    operation of the impugned Notification No.5938 and

    Order   No.5939 dated             14.7.2016,           subject    to   thePage 12 of 107appointments already made, if any.

3.8   It was the case on behalf of the original writ petitioners

      – candidates belonging to the Non­Scheduled Districts

      that the aforesaid Notification issued in exercise of

      powers conferred in para 5(i) of the Fifth Schedule of

      the Constitution of India is violative ofArticles 14& 16of the Constitution of India.Article 13(2)of the

      Constitution of India was also pressed into service.

      Heavy reliance was placed onArticle 16(2)of the

      Constitution of India. It was submitted on behalf of the

      original writ petitioners that in the garb of the non­

      obstante clause in para 5(i) of the Fifth Scheduled of

      the Constitution, the Governor cannot infringe and /

      or affect fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III

      of the Constitution and that there cannot be any 100%

      reservation, so as to make only residents of a

      particular area to be eligible for appointment to a

      public post. Heavy reliance was placed on the

      decisions of this Court in the case ofKailash Chand

      Sharma Vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors.reported inPage 13 of 107(2002) 6 SCC 562;A.V.S Narsimha Rao & Ors Vs.

State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.reported in (1969) 1

SCC 839;Dr. Pradeep Jain & Ors Vs. Union of India

& Ors.reported in (1984) 3 SCC 654;Rajesh Kumar

Gupta & Ors. Vs. State of UP & Ors.reported in

(2005) 5 SCC 172;State of Orissa & Ors. Vs. Sudhir

Kumar Bishwal & Ors.reported in 1994 Supp (3)

SCC 245 and Indra Sawhney & Ors. Vs. Union of

India & Ors. reported in 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217, in

support of their submissions that there cannot be

100% reservation for the local residents and such

100% reservation for the local residents and / or

reservations on the basis of residence shall be hit byArticle 16 (3)of the Constitution of India.On the

constitutional validity of the Notification making 100%

reservation for the local residents in exercise of powers

under para 5 of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution

of   India,   heavy   reliance         was   placed   on   recent

Constitutional Bench decision of this Court in the case

ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao & Ors Vs. State ofPage 14 of 107A.P. & Orsreported in (2021) 11 SCC 401.



4.0. On the other hand, it was the case on behalf of the

    State as well as successful candidates belonging to the

    Scheduled Districts that the Notification making 100%

    reservation for local residents of the Scheduled Areas

    was / is absolutely within the scope, ambit and powers

    of the Governor in exercise of para 5 of the Fifth

    Schedule to the Constitution of India.



4.1. It was submitted that for the upliftment of local

    residents belonging to the Scheduled Areas / Districts

    such a reservation is permissible. It was submitted

    that the object and purpose of declaring Scheduled

    Districts / Areas under Fifth Schedule is to uplift and

    for the betterment of local residents of the Scheduled

    Areas. It was also contended on behalf of the State and

    successful candidates belonging to the Scheduled

    Areas/ Districts that special powers under the Fifth

    Schedule are not subject to restriction underArticle 16of the Constitution of India. Heavy reliance was placedPage 15 of 107on the non­obstante clause. It was submitted that para

    5(i) of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of India

    begins with the words “notwithstanding contained

    anything   in   this    Constitution”.         It   was   further

    submitted that even the Governor may by public

    notification direct that any particular Act of Parliament

    shall not apply to a Scheduled Area; powers conferred

    on the Governor with respect to Scheduled Areas are

    special powers and therefore, such powers are not

    subject to any of the restrictions contained inArticle

    16and / or any other provisions of the Constitution of

    India.

5.0. By the impugned common judgment and order and

    following the decision of the Constitutional Bench of

    this Court in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra), the High Court has declared the aforesaid

    Notification    and      the       aforesaid        Advertisement

    unconstitutional and / or ultra vires, to the extent

    making 100% reservation for the local residents of the

    Scheduled Areas. By the impugned judgment andPage 16 of 107order,   the   High   Court      has   also   held   that   the

Notification and the Order are violative ofArticle 16(3)and35(a)of the Constitution of India, as such powers

are vested only in the Parliament and not with the

State Legislature. By the impugned common judgment

and order, the High Court has also quashed para 5(iii)

of the Advertisement No.21 of 2016 published on

28.12.2016 as modified by the advertisement dated

4.2.2017 to the extent it provided that as against the

vacant posts of Trained Graduate Teacher in the

Scheduled Districts, only the local residents of those

Scheduled District can apply. In the result, the High

Court has quashed all the appointments of the Trained

Graduate Teachers made pursuant to the aforesaid

advertisement, in the Scheduled Districts relating to

the local residents of those Districts only. That the

High Court has further directed that all the 8423 posts

of Trained Graduate Teacher in the Government

Secondary Schools in the Scheduled Districts of the

State of Jharkhand, be advertised afresh and fresh

selection process be undertaken in accordance withPage 17 of 107law. The High Court also further clarified that all those

     candidates who were eligible to apply in response to

     the Advertisement No.21 of 2016, shall be entitled to

     apply in the fresh selection process, irrespective of any

     barrier, if any, as to their age.

The High Court has also made it abundantly clear

     that by the ad­interim order dated 18.09.2019,

     selection process was never stayed by the Court in the

     Non­Scheduled Districts and there was no stay for

     appointments on any post in the Non­Scheduled

     Districts. According to the High Court by impugned

     common judgment and order has allowed all the writ

     petitions accordingly.

5.1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

     common judgment and order passed by the High Court

     of Jharkhand declaring Notification No. 5938 and

     Order No.5939 dated 14.07.2016 as unconstitutional

     and ultra vires toArticles 14, 16(2), 16(3)and35(a­i)of

     the Constitution of India and consequently quashingPage 18 of 107para 5(iii) of the Advertisement No. 21 of 2016

     published      on    28.12.2016          as   modified        by     the

     Advertisement        dated   4.2.2017         to    the     extent    of

     providing 100% reservation for the local residents of

     the   Thirteen       Scheduled       Districts      only,     selected

     candidates belonging to the Scheduled Areas – local

     residents of Scheduled Areas / Districts have preferred

     the present Appeals.

6.0. Dr.   Rajeev    Dhavan,       Shri       Vikas     Singh,    Shri     R.

     Venkataramani, Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned

     Senior Advocates have appeared on behalf of the

     successful candidates belonging to the Scheduled

     Areas. We have heard Shri Kapil Sibal and Shri Sunil

     Kumar learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf

     of the State of Jharkhand. We have heard Shri Ranjit

     Kumar and Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned

     Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the contesting

     respondents      –    original     petitioners       –    candidates

     belonging to the Non­Scheduled Areas / Districts. We

     have also heard Shri Ajit Kumar Sinha, Shri ColinPage 19 of 107Gonsalves and Shri Pallav Shishodia, learned Senior

     Advocates appearing on behalf of the other respective

     parties/ interveners.

7.0. Shri R. Venkataramani, learned Senior Advocate

     appearing   on   behalf       of some of the   successful

     candidates belonging to the Scheduled Districts /

     Areas has vehemently submitted that while passing

     the impugned common judgment and order the High

     Court has not properly appreciated and considered the

     object and purpose of declaration of the Scheduled

     Areas in exercise of powers conferred under Fifth

     Schedule and the object and purpose conferring

     special powers to the Governor under para 5 of the

     Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of India.



7.1. It is further submitted that the High Court has also

     not properly appreciated and considered the reasons

     for which the Notification and the order dated

     14.07.2016 was issued by the Governor of State.Page 20 of 1077.2. It is further submitted that the Notification and the

     order dated 14.07.2016 shows that the Scheduled

     Districts in the State of Jharkhand are characterized

     by low human development indices, backwardness,

     remoteness, poverty and they are on an average

     inferior to the social indicators in the State due to

     uneven topography, lack of water resources, loss in

     canopy average of forest and uncontrolled rapid

     industrialization. That due to the aforesaid grounds

     and the reasons, the Notification had to be issued by

     the Governor      for   protecting       the   interest of the

     residents of the Scheduled Districts.



7.3. Taking us to theArticle 29, 38and46of the

     Constitution of India and reliance being placed onArticle 244of the Constitution of India which deals

     with the administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal

     Areas to which Fifth Schedule of the Constitution

     applies, it is vehemently submitted that the said

     administration has to take special care of the interests

     of   minorities   and     the      people   belonging   to   thePage 21 of 107Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the weaker

    sections of the society, and to protect them from social

    injustice and all forms of exploitation. It is submitted

    that therefore, Notification / order dated 14.07.2016

    issued by the Governor in exercise of powers conferred

    under   para   5(i)   of   the     Fifth   Scheduled   of   the

    Constitution of India which was issued to protect the

    interest of local residents of the Scheduled Areas and

    for their upliftment, ought not to have been held to be

    ultra vires and / or unconstitutional by the High

    Court. It is submitted that the impugned judgment

    and order passed by the High Court has the effect of

    taking away special rights conferred on the Governor,

    conferred under para 5 of the of the Fifth Schedule of

    the Constitution of India.

7.4. It is further submitted thatArticle 16(2)of the

    Constitution of India prohibits discrimination on the

    grounds “only” of religion, race, caste, sex, descent,

    place of birth, residence and these expressions are

    preceded by the word “only” and followed by thePage 22 of 107expression “or any of them” which play a very

      important     role.     It      is     submitted         by    Shri        R.

      Venkataramani, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf   of   petitioners            that       successful     candidates

      belonged to the Scheduled Area, though it was the

      contention on behalf of the original petitioners that

      discrimination is prohibited on the ground mentioned

      inArticle 16(2)and16(3)and if any protective action is

      required to be taken underArticles 29, 38and46of

      the Constitution of India the same is taken on any or

      more of those grounds, in combination with other

      factors andArticle 16(2)of the Constitution of India

      shall not be attracted, even if it                       results in some

      discrimination to the other set of citizens.



7.5   Shri R. Venkataramani, learned Senior Advocate

      appearing     on      behalf         of       petitioners     has    further

      submitted     that     Governor               of   the    State     is   fully

      competent under para 5(i) of the Fifth Schedule of the

      Constitution of India to issue notification making

      reservation in favour of the residents of the ScheduledPage 23 of 107Districts in order to secure justice, social, economic

     and political to the residents suffering variously in the

     backdrop      of    the    conditions      mentioned    in    the

     Notification. It is urged that underArticle 15(4)of the

     Constitution of India, the State is empowered to make

     special provisions for the advancement of any socially

     and educationally backward classes of citizens or for

     Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as such there

     is no violation ofArticles 14& 16of the Constitution of

     India.   It    is    further         submitted   by    Shri   R.

     Venkataramani, learned Senior Advocate that the

     Scheduled Area cannot be equated with the non­

     scheduled areas. It is submitted that taking into

     consideration various factors, it was found necessary

     to protect the interests of the residents of the

     Scheduled Districts.

7.6. It is submitted that it would be of immense benefit to

     the school going children in the Scheduled Districts, if

     they are taught in their own tribal language by the

     local teachers, rather than by outsiders, who may notPage 24 of 107be well conversant with the local language. It is urged

     that orders under challenge before the High Court as

     such did not suffer from any denial of equality of

     opportunity and / or discriminatory. Further the order

     under challenge before the High Court only distributes

     equality of opportunity in terms of felt needs of the

     Scheduled Areas of the State. Hence, there can be no

     objection to reasonable provisions being made as

     regards Scheduled Areas. It is submitted that the

     Constitution    permits       discrimination,   albeit   on

     reasonable grounds.

7.7. It is further submitted that the scope ofArticle 16(3)is

     confined to inter State borders and that it has no

     application to areas within a State. In this context,

     reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the

     case of AVS Narasimha Rao and Ors. Vs. The State

     of A.P. reported in (1970) 1 SCR 115.

7.8. It is submitted that the Governor has the power under

     para 1 of the Fifth Schedule to enact any measure inPage 25 of 107the interests of the Scheduled Areas. No dichotomy

between the powers under paras 1 and 2 of the Fifth

Schedule can be suggested. That they are only

different facets of the plenary powers of the Governor.

It is submitted that the powers conferred on the

Governor under para 5(1) and (2) of the Fifth Schedule

are plenary and exclusive powers. It is submitted that

therefore the Governor can also stay the law made by

the Parliament and hence the said powers are not

subject   to   restrictions      underArticle   16of   the

Constitution of India.

Shri R. Venkataramani, learned Senior Advocate

appearing      on   behalf    of        petitioners    has   further

submitted that as such the decision of this Court in

the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra) is not

applicable at all to the facts of the case on hand.That

in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra)

there was 100% preference / reservation in favour of

only of Scheduled Tribes of the respective local areas of

Andhra Pradesh, where schools are located. It isPage 26 of 107submitted that in the instant case there is no such

     reservation only in favour of the Scheduled Tribes of

     the Scheduled Areas.He has pointed out the following

     distinguishing features in support of his submissions

     that the decision of this Court in the case ofChebrolu

     Leela Prasad Rao(supra) shall not be made applicable

     to the present cases.

I.     All candidates whether in Scheduled or non­
            Scheduled Areas can apply only in the District.
     II.    Only Class III and IV posts at the District Level
            included. In the context of fitness of transfers of
            employees, generally this Court has observed that
            Class III and Class IV posts stand on a separate
            footing.

III.   All   candidates      within        the   districts, whether
            SC/ST/BC or OBC, General can apply.

IV.    The provisions were experimental i.e., to last only
            for 10 years. (legislative experiments in Socio­
            economic matters will receive judicial deference.


7.9. Relying upon the decisions of this Court in the case ofRam Kripal Bhagat Vs. State of Biharreported in

     (1970) 3 SCR 233 and in the case ofPuranlalPage 27 of 107Lakhanpal Vs. President of Indiareported in AIR

     1961 SC 1519, it is prayed that there is need for

     reconsideration of the decision in the case ofChebrolu

     Leela Prasad Rao(supra).

7.10. It is further submitted that in the present case, the

     Notification issued by the Governor, impugned before

     the High Court are not hit byArticles 14and16of the

     Constitution of India and as such do not fall within the

     scope of the judgment of this Court in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra). It is submitted

     that the notifications can be traced both toArticle

     16(3)and the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution. It is

     further submitted that under the Fifth Schedule the

     Governor is placed at par with the parliament and the

     State legislature, and the power exercisable thereunder

     is plenary legislative power, and not subordinate to

     any other legislative power. The power of the Governor

     not to apply a parliamentary law to a Scheduled Area

     would place her/ him at par with the power of the

     Parliament   available   underArticle   16(3)of   thePage 28 of 107Constitution.

7.11. It is further submitted that that the Governor can do

     what the Parliament can do underArticle 16(3)of the

     Constitution, and thus enact in respect of requirement

     of residence, as a measure of taking care of the

     interests of schools in scheduled areas. It is further

     submitted that sinceArticle 16(3)is an exception toArticle 16(1)any reasonable provision as regards

     residence requirement will be saved. It does not matter

     that the law is made either by Parliament or the

     Governor. The power of the Governor not to apply a

     parliamentary law includes the power to do what the

     parliament can otherwise do.

7.12. It is further submitted that it is open to treat the
     notifications not as the amending instruments of the
     Rules made by the State of Jharkhand underArticle
     309relating to appointment of teaching staff. It is
     submitted that in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad
     Rao(supra) answering question 2(b) raised therein it
     was opined that since Rules made underArticle 309are not Parliamentary or State law they cannot bePage 29 of 107amended under para 5 of the Fifth Schedule.


7.13.It is further submitted that Fifth Schedule is a

    Constitution     within        the    constitution,   (SeeKesavananda Bharati Vs. State of Kerala(1973) 4

    SCC 225) which suggests that the paramount interest

    of the scheduled areas and their development in ways

    that would suit the areas (for instance lands, forests,

    mineral wealth, etc. and the need to ensure against

    exploitation) will always inform the Governor in the

    exercise of powers under the Fifth Schedule.



7.14. It is further submitted that the rules relating to

    appointment themselves provide that no candidate can

    apply to posts in more than one district, and that the

    cadres are district level and not State level cadres. The

    Notification only extends the same restriction of one

    district application to Scheduled Areas, keeping in

    view the interests of all Scheduled Areas. There is no

    inter se discrimination amongst eligible candidates

    residing within the Scheduled Areas. All principles ofPage 30 of 107reservation to other categories of candidates are also

     applicable.

7.15. It is submitted that this court has saved domicile as a

     reasonable principle as regards access to education

     and public employment. The safeguards enacted inArticle   371D,   for   example,     are   one   proximate

     illustration.

7.16. It is submitted that the impugned Notifications are not

     discriminatory. They do not look only at the place of

     residence as the factor, relevant for appointment to

     schools in Scheduled Areas. They treat residence as

     one among other factors, namely the best way of

     promoting the interests of schools in Scheduled Areas

     as a prominent or dominant aspect. In the balancing of

     the interests of schools in Scheduled Areas and the

     right of all in all districts to be considered for

     appointment as teachers, if the factor of residence

     within the scheduled district will tip in favour of the

     schools' interest, then the emphasis inArticle 16(2)onPage 31 of 107non­discrimination "'only»' on grounds of residence will

     yield toArticle 16(3).

7.17. It is submitted thatArticle 16(2)of the Constitution of

     India prohibits discrimination on the grounds "only" of

     religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth,

     residence, and these expressions are preceded by the

     word "only" and followed by the expression "or any of

     them', which are significant. In the present case, the

     cumulative factors of low human development indices,

     backwardness, remoteness, poverty, inferiority in the

     social    indicators   in       the        State   due   to   uneven

     topography, lack of water resources, loss in canopy

     average      of   forest          and         uncontrolled     rapid

     industrialization have been taken into consideration.



7.18. It is further submitted that the Governor of the State is

     fully competent under paragraph 5(1) of Fifth Schedule

     of the Constitution of India to issue the notification

     making reservation in favour of the residents of the

     scheduled districts in order to secure justice­ social,Page 32 of 107economic and political, to the residents suffering

    variously in the backdrop of the conditions mentioned

    in the notification.

7.19.In the alternative, it is prayed that even if the

    Notification / Order impugned before the High Court

    are held to be unconstitutional and / or ultra vires,in

    that case, as done by this Court in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra) the appointments

    already made in the Scheduled Areas be saved even by

    exercising power underArticle 142of the Constitution

    of India. It is submitted that in many cases those

    candidates who have been appointed in the Scheduled

    Areas, were either working in the non­Scheduled Areas

    or for getting appointment in the Non­Scheduled Areas

    they   had   left   their    jobs       as   they   were   getting

    appointment in their own Districts. It is submitted that

    equities are also in their favour. It is further submitted

    that even appointment of the petitioners may not be

    disturbed when large number of posts are still lying

    vacant in the State of Jharkhand and under thePage 33 of 107provision of Right to Education Act, fundamental

     rights are available to the residents of the area to have

     access to education and further it is duty cast upon

     the State to provide education.

7.20. It is submitted that the High Court has erred in not

     protecting the appointments already made by narrowly

     applying the decision in the case ofChebrolu Leela

     Prasad Rao(supra). One of the factors for protecting

     appointments made to public services in pursuance of

     open competition and fair opportunity, even though

     falling foul of any other legal factor, will be whether the

     appointments are vitiated by the candidature’s fraud

     or benefit, and whether the appointees will lose on

     various counts. It is a matter of record that a large

     number of appointees have left their previous jobs.Even in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra), persons appointed as recently as in 2020 have

     been protected.Reliance is also placed on the

     judgement inDr. Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil Vs. ChiefPage 34 of 107Minister2021 SCC Online SC 362 for protection

     granted by Court to the appointments already made.



8.0. Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned Senior Advocate appearing

     on behalf of some of the petitioners – candidates

     belonging to the Scheduled Districts / Areas has

     elaborately made submission on the use of the word

     “only” underArticle 15(1)and16(2)of the Constitution

     of India.

8.1. It is submitted by Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned Senior

     Advocate appearing for the some of the petitioners that

     use of the word “only” inArticle 15(1)and16(2)of the

     Constitution of India would suggest that any of the

     prohibited classification “including caste” cannot be

     taken as the basis of the classification unless there is

     some wider constitutional or public purpose and the

     classification has a nexus to and subserves that

     purpose. Reliance is placed on the decision of this

     Court in the case ofKailash Chandra Sharma(supra)

     (para 14) on the prohibitions inArticle 16(2).That it isPage 35 of 107observed inthe said decisionthat prohibitory mandate

     underArticle 16(2)is not attracted if the alleged

     discrimination is on grounds not merely related to

     residence but the factum of residence is only taken

     into account in addition to other relevant factors.



8.2.Reliance is also placed on the decision of this Court in

     the case ofP. Rajendran Vs. State of Madrasreported

     in (1968) 2 SCR 786. It is submitted that as held by

     this Court in the aforesaid decision if the reservation

     in question, had been based only on caste and had not

     taken   into     account   the         social   and   educational

     backwardness of the caste in question, it would be

     violative ofArticle 15(1)but it must not be forgotten

     that a caste can also refer to a class of citizens and if

     the caste as a whole is socially and educationally

     backward, reservation can be made in favour of such a

     caste on the ground that such a caste is socially and

     educationally backward class within the meaning ofArticle 15(4).

Page 36 of 1078.3. Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned Senior Advocate has also

    relied upon the decisions of this Court in the case ofN.

    Vasundhara Vs. State of Mysorereported in (1971) 2

    SCC 22 and in the case of Jayshree Vs. State of

    Kerala reported in (1976) 3 SCC 730 in support of his

    submission that for upliftment of local residents

    belonging to the Schedules Areas, the Governor can in

    exercise of powers conferred under para 5 of the Fifth

    Schedule stay any of the Act made by the Parliament

    and / or State and the same cannot be said to be

    affecting rights of the individual underArticles 16(2)and16(3)of the Constitution of India.



9.0. Shri Vikas Singh, learned Senior Advocate appearing

    on behalf of some of the original petitioners has made

    further submission in support of the prayer to mould

    the relief to protect the services of the already

    appointed candidates as they participated in a fair

    process of selection in which no malpractice was

    involved. It is submitted that even today, there are

    more than 4000 posts available in the ScheduledPage 37 of 107Districts which are lying vacant.In support of his

above prayer, it is urged that this Court, in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra) had saved the

appointments already made. It is submitted that this

was because at least 50% of the seats had been

reserved for Scheduled Tribes only which was struck

down by this Court. It is submitted that applying the

said observations in the present case also this Court

while exercising its extraordinary powers conferred

underArticle 142of the Constitution of India may

protect the appointments made in the State of

Jharkhand as about 50% appointments of total

advertised vacancies have been made till now. It is

submitted that if the appointments already made are

set aside pursuant to the impugned common judgment

and order passed by the High Court,in that case,

lakhs of children who go to the school would be

without teachers which would be contrary to the

constitutional mandate of Right to Education as

provided underArticle 21Aof the Constitution of India.Page 38 of 1079.1. It    is   submitted    that       thousands        of    innocent

     petitioners / teachers will be rendered unemployed as

     against 219 contesting respondents / interveners.

     That the paramount public interest demands that the

     appointments already made are not disturbed and the

     impugned        judgment      is        made   to     apply    only

     prospectively.

9.2. It is submitted that as such the original petitioners

     took part in the selection process, knowing fully well

     about the reservation made in favour of the local

     residents of the Scheduled Districts and thereafter

     having taken part in the selection process and having

     failed in getting selected, they cannot now turn around

     and challenge the conditionslaid down      inthe

     advertisement.

9.3. It is further submitted that it is not true that less

     meritorious candidates were given appointment and

     the    rights   of   meritorious         candidates      has   been

     hampered. That as a matter of fact, in all most everyPage 39 of 107subject most of the appellants herein were much more

    meritorious than that of last selected / non selected /

    less    meritorious     candidates      of   Non­Scheduled

    Districts.

Making above submissions, it is prayed to mould

    the relief and to direct to apply the impugned common

    judgment and order passed by the High Court

    prospectively and / or at least to save appointments

    already made.

10.0. Similar prayer to mould the relief and save the

    appointments already made and to direct to apply

    impugned judgment and order passed by the High

    Court prospectively has been made by Shri P.S.

    Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

    of some of the appellants/ teachers already appointed.

In the alternative, it is prayed that only those writ

    petitioners i.e., about 219 candidates may be given

    opportunity to submit an option of the Districts wherePage 40 of 107they would like to be appointed, which would be done

    with reference to their merit against the vacant posts

    and with respect to rest of the vacant posts, the State

    may issue a fresh advertisement in accordance with

    law, with the age relaxation to the candidate who had

    already participated in the 2016 selection.In support

    of his above submission, reliance is placed on the

    decision of this Court in the case ofHanuman Dutt

    Shukla Vs. State of Uttar Pradeshreported in (2018)

    16 SCC 447.

10.1. Shri Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate has also
    reiterated what has been submitted on behalf of the
    other counsel on merits by assailing the impugned
    common judgment and order passed by the High Court
    and on the constitutional validity of the Notification /
    Orders issued by the Governor / State Government
    providing reservation for candidates belonging to the
    local residents of the Scheduled Areas/ Districts.


11.0. Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned Senior Advocate
    appearing on behalf of some of the appellants herein –
    candidates already appointed has made following
    submissions in support of her prayer to mould thePage 41 of 107relief in favour of already appointed candidates.


I.     That the appointments were made before the
       decision of this Court in the case ofChebrolu
       Leela Prasad Rao(supra). Thus, at the time of
       appointment of the petitioners herein, law in the
       State of Jharkhand was not clear and was in a
       state of flux;

II.    Even this Court has vide final order in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra) has saved
       the appointments;

III.   That all the appointed candidates­ petitioners are
       appointed by a fair process of selection and they
       are all meritorious candidates;

IV.    The Schools would be without teachers in case
       the petitioners are ousted from service. In SLP
       (C)No.12490 of 2020 about 1108 schools would
       be having no teachers and therefore, it may affect
       the education of the pupils. That the residents of
       the Scheduled Areas are also having right to
       education which is a fundamental right as
       provided    under      the        Constitution   of   India.
       Therefore, if the petitioners and other already
       appointed teachers are removed,in that case, thePage 42 of 107schools would be without teachers and therefore,
           it may affect / hamper the education in the State
           of Jharkhand.

11.1. Ms. Makhija, learned Senior Advocate has also relied

      upon the decisions of this Court in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra),Kailash Chand

      Sharma Vs. State of Rajasthanreported in (2002) 6

      SCC 562, K Madhav Reddy Vs. State of A.P reported

      in (2014) 6 SCC 537, R.K. Sabharwal Vs. State of

      Punjab reported in (1995) 2 SCC 745 and Baburam

      Vs. CC Jacobreported in (1999) 3 SCC 362, in

      support of her prayer to direct to apply the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court only

      prospectively.

12.   While assailing the impugned judgment and order

      passed by the High Court Shri Kapil Sibal, learned

      Senior Advocate and Shri Sunil Kumar, learned Senior

      Advocate   appearing     on      behalf   of   the   State   of

      Jharkhand have vehemently submitted that in thePage 43 of 107present case and in the facts and                     circumstances of

     the case, High Court has committed a grave error in

     declaring the Notification / Order issued by the

     Governor / State Government and the advertisement

     providing     reservation       for        the   local     residents    of

     Scheduled Area / Districts as unconstitutional and

     ultra viresArticles 14, 16and35of the Constitution of

     India.

12.1. It is submitted on behalf of the State that there is a

     basic     fallacy    in   the    contention           of   the   original

     petitioners that the impugned Notification makes the

     District as the basis of classification. It is submitted

     that     as   such    a   classification         is      made    by    the

     Constitution itself and the basis is “Scheduled Area” as

     contemplated underArticle 244r/w Fifth Schedule of

     the Constitution of India. That the Scheduled Areas

     are such of those areas comprised of mostly tribal

     population within the different States constituting the

     Union of India which the Constitution of India treats

     as special in the matter of its governance. That thePage 44 of 107President may, by an order declare any such area as

Scheduled Area under para 6 of Fifth Schedule of the

Constitution of India. Under sub­para 2 of para 5 of

Fifth Schedule, the President may direct that the whole

or any specified part of a Scheduled Area shall cease to

be a Scheduled Area or a part of such an area, or even

increase the area of a Scheduled Area in the State.

Thus the President may declare an entire District as a

Scheduled Area or a part of the District as a Scheduled

Area or even the combination of two Districts as a

Scheduled Area.    It is submitted that in the instant

case on a consideration of the demography of the

different Districts in the State of Jharkhand, the

President of India formed an opinion to declare the

areas comprised in 13 Districts as a Scheduled Area

and made the Scheduled Areas (State of Jharkhand)

Order, 2007. That as time passes the President may

declare that a portion of any of the 13 Districts may

cease to be a Scheduled Area or even increase the area

of any of the declared Scheduled Areas by combining

portions of two Districts. Therefore the impugnedPage 45 of 107Notification and order makes the District as the basis

     of classification. It is submitted that as such there is

     no   challenge   to   the     Scheduled   Area    (State   of

     Jharkhand) Order, 2007 in these cases.


12.2. So far as the contention on behalf of the original writ

     petitioners that impugned Notification and Order

     purport to modify Rules framed under the proviso toArticle 309which are neither an Act of Parliament nor

     an Act of State Legislature, it is submitted that as

     such impugned Notification carves out an exception by

     stating “Notwithstanding anything contained in these

     rules or any other Act, Order, Direction, Rules or Law

     for the time being in force” and hence would include

     an Act of Parliament like the “Right of Children to Free

     and Compulsory Education Act, 2009”              which was

     enacted pursuant to Article 21­A of the Constitution of

     India and is applicable to Elementary Schools. It is

     submitted thatSection 23of the said 2009 Act makes

     provision for eligibility for appointment of teachers in

     Elementary Schools. Hence the impugned NotificationPage 46 of 107would have to be read as carving out an exception /

     modification to an Act of the Parliament i.e.,Section

     23of the said 2009 Act and same cannot be faulted

     with.

12.3. It is submitted that the impugned Notification and the

     Rules appended thereto which are being excepted /

     modified, are both expressed to have been made by

     “The Order of the Governor” and authenticated in the

     manner    prescribed      underArticle   166(2)of   the

     Constitution of India. That the source of power to issue

     the impugned Notification can be traced to para 5(1) of

     Schedule V as also proviso toArticle 309of the

     Constitution of India. It is submitted that the omission

     to mention “read with proviso toArticle 309of the

     Constitution” after ‘in exercise of powers conferred by

     the provision of sub­para (1) of para 5 of the Fifth

     Schedule ...” in the impugned Notification shall not

     affect / invalidate the amendment to the Rules framed

     under the proviso toArticle 309of the Constitution of

     India. That in the case ofUnion of India and Anr. Vs.Page 47 of 107Tulsiram Patelreported in (1985) 3 SCC 398 (para

126) it is observed that the source of power exists by

     reading together two provisions, whether statutory or

     constitutional and the order refers to only one of them

     but the validity of the order should be upheld by

     construing it as an order passed under both the

     provisions.

12.4 Now so far as submission on behalf of the original writ

     petitioners whether the impugned Notification / Order

     are violative ofArticle 16of the Constitution of India is

     concerned,    it   is   vehemently          submitted    that     the

     impugned Notification and Order are not “only” on the

     ground of residence. It is submitted that social

     indicators in the scheduled areas being lesser as

     compared to the other areas of the State as also the

     other factors mentioned in the impugned Notification /

     Order which indicate that those residing therein are

     not equally circumstanced as those residing in the

     Non­   Scheduled        Areas,      there    is   no   equality    of

     opportunity. Hence, a duty is cast upon the State to

     minimize the inequalities in income and endevour toPage 48 of 107eliminate    inequalities           in        status,    facilities   and

opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also

amongst group of people residing in different areas or

engaged in different vocations. It is submitted that the

Directive Principle of State policy contained inArticles

38, 39, 39­A, 43 and 46 part IV of the Constitution of

India would apply in this case. It is submitted that the

impugned order No.5939 dated 14.07.2016 was issued

after noticing the Report of Tribal Advisory Council

and   various      factors         of    inequality       between     the

Scheduled Areas and Non­Scheduled Area, it is stated

therein that, inter alia, that additional opportunities of

employment had to be provided to those residing in

Scheduled Areas. That in the case ofKailash Chand

Sharma(supra)        (para        48)    it   is   observed     that

“equalising unequals by taking note of their handicaps

and   limitation      is     not        impermissible       under     the

Constitution provided that it seeks to achieve the goals

of promoting overall equality”. It is urged that in the

present case it was expected that overall equality

would be achieved by expression / modification of thePage 49 of 107Rules made by impugned Notification and Order for a

     period of ten years. Therefore, as such, the impugned

     Notification and order cannot be said to be violativeArticle 16of the Constitution of India.



12.5. Now so far as submission on behalf of the original writ

     petitioners that the impugned Notification is violative

     ofArticle 14of the Constitution of India is concerned,

     it is vehemently submitted by learned Senior Advocate

     on behalf of the State that such argument based on

     infringement ofArticle 14is fallacious. It is contended

     that whileArticle 14guarantees that the State shall

     not deny to any person equality before law or the equal

     protection of laws, para 5(1) of Fifth Schedule starts

     with a non obstante clause which empowers the

     Governor to direct that any Central Law or State Law

     shall not apply to a Scheduled Area or part thereof or

     may apply with such exceptions or modifications as he

     may direct. It is submitted that if the submission on

     behalf of the original petitioners that the impugned

     notification / order is in violation ofArticle 14isPage 50 of 107accepted,in that case, it would lead to an apparent

     conflict between two constitutional provisions, viz.Article 14and para 5(1) of Fifth Schedule. It is

     submitted that this conflict can only be resolved by

     following the well settled principle of harmonious

     construction that the special law shall prevail over the

     general.Reliance is placed on the decision of this

     Court in the case ofJ K Spinning and Weaving Mills

     Co. Ltd Vs. State of UPreported in AIR 1961 SC

     1170 (para 9). It is submitted that said provision for

     the Governance and development of the Scheduled

     Areas and the Tribals residing therein would never be

     subject to the general provisions of the fundamental

     rights guaranteed underArticle 16.

12.6 In the alternative, it is prayed by the learned Senior

     Advocate appearing on behalf of the State not to

     disturb the appointments already made earlier and to

     apply the impugned common judgment and order

     passed by the High Court prospectively so that it may

     not affect the education of the local residents of thePage 51 of 107Scheduled Areas. It is submitted that if the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court is

      implemented and the appointments already made are

      also set aside as observed and held by the High Court,in that case, the teachers will have to be relieved and

      many schools in the Scheduled Areas would be

      without teachers and it may ultimately hamper

      education in the State and which may violate the

      fundamental rights which would be available to the

      local residents of the Scheduled Area guaranteed

      underArticle 21A of the Constitution of India.

13.   Present Appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Ranjit

      Kumar and Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned

      Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the contesting

      respondents    –   original     petitioners   –   candidates

      belonging to the Non­Scheduled Areas / Districts.



13.1. Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior Advocate appearing

      on behalf of the original writ petitioners appearing in

      Civil Appeal No.4044 of 2022 on behalf of Soni KumariPage 52 of 107has submitted that the original writ petitioners (W.P

No.1387 of 2017 before the High Court) approached

the High Court challenging the State Government

Notification No.5938          and Order No.5939 dated

14.07.2016 whereby in Thirteen Scheduled Districts in

Jharkhand (out of total 24 Districts) only local

residents of Thirteen Scheduled Districts were made

eligible for appointment to Class III and IV posts for a

period of 10 years as well as advertisement dated

28.12.2016 as modified on 4.12.2017 and clause V (iii)

which restricted only local residents / domicile of

notified / Scheduled Districts alone being entitled to

submit application against vacancies earmarked for

the said Districts.    It is submitted that due to the

impugned Notification / order and the advertisement

she was constrained to submit the application Form

for District Palamu – a Non­Scheduled District, though

after her marriage she is residing at Ranchi, a

Scheduled District. It is submitted that she had

secured more marks than the cut off marks obtained

by the last selected candidate in her category andPage 53 of 107subject in the Scheduled Districts and yet she was not

     selected.   It   is    submitted           that   in    this      factual

     background the challenge to the impugned notification

     / order and the advancement are required to be

     appreciated.

13.2. It is submitted by Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior

     Advocate that the issues which arises for consideration

     in the instant case are:

It is submitted that the Parliament alone is empowered

     to make the law prescribing residential requirement

     within a State or Union Territory, as the case may be,

     in relation to a class or classes of employment. It is

     submitted   that     therefore,        in    the   absence   of

     parliamentary      law,     even       the    prescription   of

     requirement as to residence within the State is

     impossible. In support of above submission, reliance is

     placed on the decision of this Court in the case of AVS

     Narasimha Rao & Ors. Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh

     & Anr. reported in (1969) 1 SCC 839, Kailash Chand

     Sharma Vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors. reported in

     (2002) 6 SCC 562 (para 13­14) and Rajesh Kumar

     Gupta & Ors. Vs. State of UP & Ors. reported in

     (2005) 5 SCC 172 (para 16 &b 17).

13.6. It is further submitted that even otherwise impugned

     orders / notification as sought to introduce 100%

     reservation in the Thirteen Scheduled District in thePage 58 of 107State of Jharkhand whereby only local residents of

     said Districts were declared eligible for appointment to

     Class III and IV posts for the period of 10 years, are

     contrary to the law laid down by this Court in the case

     of Indra Sawhney (supra) (para 788) as well as recent

     decision of the Constitutional Bench of this Court in

     the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra) (para

104) wherein it has been held that the outer limit of

     the reservations contemplated in Clause (4) ofArticle

     16of the Constitution of India should not normally

     exceed the limit of 50%.

13.7. Now so far as justification by the State in invoking

     “sons of the soil” policy prescribing reservation or

     preference based on domicile or residence as already

     been decried by this Court in the case ofDr. Pradeep

     Jain Vs. UOIreported in (1984) 3 SCC 654 (para 5), it

     is submitted that inthe said decisionit is observed

     and held that the Parliament alone has been given the

     right   to   enact   an    exception   to   the   ban   on

     discrimination based on residence. The impugnedPage 59 of 107Government Notifications No. 5938 & 5939 dated

     14.07.2016 are ex facie violative ofArticle 14of the

     Constitution in as much as the same is not based on

     any intelligible differentia and does not have any

     rational nexus with the object and purpose it has set

     out to achieve i.e., selection of the most competent

     teachers to impart quality education in secondary and

     high   schools   run     by      State   Government     and

     improvement of educational standard of the residents

     within the State. It is submitted that many districts

     notified as Scheduled Districts like East Singhbhum

     (Jamshedpur) and Ranchi are at the top half of the

     Human     Development      Index      (HDI)   in   Jharkhand

     whereas the Petitioner's District Palamau has the

     lowest HDI in the State, yet has been classified as a

     Non­Scheduled District which smacks of arbitrariness

     adopted by the State in determination of Schedule and

     Non­ Scheduled Districts.

13.8. It is further submitted that even the contention raised

     by the State Government and some of the learnedPage 60 of 107counsel    appearing        on    behalf     of   the   candidates

belonging to the Scheduled Areas that the impugned

Notification / Order were premised on the basis that

candidates who knew the local tribal language spoken

in the concerned district would be in a better position

to teach the students, is absolutely fallacious. It is

submitted that as such said contention has not been

approved and / or accepted by this Court in the case

ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra). That even

otherwise TGT Recruitment Process is conducted for

selection of Trained Graduate Teachers to teach

various subjects in Secondary Schools. It is submitted

that thus excepting for the local tribal language

subject,   all   other      subjects      (viz.   English,   Hindi,

Mathematics, Science,            Social    Studies)     which     are

general in nature must be taught by the most

meritorious teachers so as to bring about an all­round

development      of   the     students       as   opposed    to    a

substandard teacher whose contribution is negligible

in academics.

Page 61 of 107It is submitted that Hindi is the official language

     in Jharkhand and is also the common medium of

     interaction among the various regions in the State

     since over 21 languages are spoken in the State. That

     therefore, it stands to no reason that persons who do

     not know all 21 regional languages spoken in the State

     would be unable to impart education to the students

     in those regions. It is submitted that any person who

     is well versed in Hindi (Devnagari script) is more than

     competent to effectively impart education to the

     students in all districts in the State without any

     hindrance.

13.9. It is further submitted by Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned

     Senior Advocate that once impugned Notification /

     Order are held to be unconstitutional and ultra vires toArticles 14, 16and35of the Constitution of India,in

     that    case,   any   appointment       made   violating   the

     fundamental rights of the original writ petitioners and

     appointment made pursuant to such unconstitutional

     provisions, the same have to be set aside. It isPage 62 of 107submitted that therefore, the High Court has not

    committed any error in quashing the appointment of

    the original writ petitioner. In support of his above

    submission, following recent decisions are relied upon:

II.    State of UP and Ors. Vs. Anand Kumar Yadav
           and Ors.reported in (2018) 13 SCC 560.

III.Renu Vs. District & Sessions Judgereported in
           (2014) 15 SCC 731.

IV.    State of MP Vs. Dharam Birreported in (1998)
           6 SCC 165.

V.     Syed Khalid Rizvi and Ors. Vs. Union of India
           and Ors.reported in 1993 Supp. (3) SCC 575.VI.    Surajprakash Gupta and Ors. Vs. State of J &
           K and Ors. reported in (2000) 7 SCC 561.

VII.R.S. Garg Vs. State of UP and Ors.reported in
           (2006) 6 SCC 430.

VIII. Secretary, State of Karnataka and Ors. Vs.
           Umadevi (3) and Ors. reported in (2006) 4 SCC

1.


13.10       It is further submitted by Shri Ranjit Kumar,Page 63 of 107learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respective   original     writ      petitioners   –   candidates

belonging to the Non­Scheduled Districts has also

requested to mould the relief underArticle 142of the

Constitution of India by directing to prepare a revised

merit list based on the already published cut off

obtained by the last selected candidate in each TGT

subject against respective categories. It is submitted

that this would entail that no fresh or de novo

recruitment process is initiated qua the advertised

posts on the one hand, while on the other hand

candidates from the present pool itself including the

original writ petition – Soni Kumar and 218 similarly

situated candidates as well as even the present

selected candidates will get an opportunity to be

considered for appointment as TGT teachers. Reliance

is placed on the decision of this Court in the case ofRajesh Kumar Vs. State of Biharreported in (2013)

4 SCC 690 and Ran Vijay Singh Vs. State of UP

reported in (2018) 2 SCC 357, in support of hisPage 64 of 107request and prayer to mould the relief as prayed for.

14.   Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan, the learned Senior

      Advocate has also made elaborate submissions in

      support of the impugned common judgment and order.

15.   In the State of Jharkhand 13 Districts were declared

      as Scheduled Districts / Areas in exercise of powers

      conferred by sub­paragraph (2) of Paragraph 6 of the

      Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of India. That the

      State Government has framed the Recruitment Rules,

      2015   prescribing     conditions       /   qualifications          for

      appointment of teachers. The said Rules are in

      exercise   of   powers      underArticle     309of     the

      Constitution    of   India.     That    vide      Circular        dated

      18.04.2016 and pursuant to the order passed by the

      High Court, the State Government has prescribed

      definition of “Local Resident of Jharkhand”. As per the

      said circular, Local Resident of Jharkhand would be

      deemed to be Indian Citizens who are fulfilling any one

      condition out of the following criteria: ­Page 65 of 107“(i).he  would have been residing within the
           geographical limits of the State of Jharkhand and
           either his own name or name of his forefather would
           have been lying recorded in Survey Khata. In the
           cases of landless, he would be identified by the
           concerning Gram Sabha which would be based on
           language, culture & traditions prevailing in the State
           of Jharkhand.

(ii)would have been residing within the geographical
           limits of the State of Jharkhand for the past 30
           years or more due to any trade, employment and
           other reasons and would have earned immovable
           property or such person has wife/husband /child
           and affirm commitment to stay in Jharkhand State.

(iii) would have been appointed & working
           officer/employee under the Government of State of
           Jharkhand / institutions being run/recognized by
           the State Government, Corporation etc.  Or has
           wife/husband /child and affirm commitment to stay
           in Jharkhand state.

(iv)Officer/employee of the Government of India,
           working in the     State of Jharkhand or have 188
           wife/husband /child and affirm      commitment to
           stay in Jharkhand state.

(v)Person appointed at any constitutional or
           statutory posts in the State of Jharkhand or have
           wife/husband /child and affirm      commitment to
           stay in Jharkhand state.

(vi) Such person who would have born in the State
           of Jharkhand and completed his whole education
           upto Matriculation or its equivalent level from the
           recognized institutions established in the state of
           Jharkhand & affirm commitment to stay in
           Jharkhand state.”

16.   That thereafter, Governor of Jharkhand / State

      Government in exercise of powers under Paragraph

      2(1) of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of IndiaPage 66 of 107has issued the order / Notification dated 14.07.2016,

inter alia, providing that notwithstanding anything

contained in any Appointment / Recruitment Rules or

any other Act, Order, Direction, Rules or Law for the

time being in force only local residents of the

Scheduled Areas / Districts in the State shall be

eligible for recruitment to the vacancy arising in Class

III and IV posts of the District Cadre in various

departments of the concerned Districts, for a period of

10 years from the date of issue of the said Notification.

The Order and Notification, validity of which have been

questioned, are extracted hereinunder:

(2) The State shall not make any law which takes
          away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part
          and any law made in contravention of this clause
          shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.

            (3) In this article, unless the context otherwise
          requires,— (a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order,
          bye­law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or
          usage having in the territory of India the force of
          law;

(b) “laws in force” includes laws passed or made by
          a Legislature or other competent authority in the
          territory of India before the commencement of this
          Constitution     and     not   previously  repealed,
          notwithstanding that any such law or any part
          thereof may not be then in operation either at all or
          in particular areas.

(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any
          amendment of this Constitution made under article

368.

xxx          xxx             xxxArticle 16.Equality of opportunity in matters
          of public employment ­ (1) There shall be equality
          of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
          employment or appointment to any office under thePage 72 of 107State.

(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any
of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in
respect of, any employment or office under the State.

(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament
from making any law prescribing, in regard to a
class or classes of employment or appointment to an
office 1[under the Government of, or any local or
other authority within, a State or Union territory, any
requirement as to residence within that State or
Union territory] prior to such employment or
appointment.

(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from
making any provision for the reservation of
appointments or posts in favour of any backward
class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is
not adequately represented in the services under the
State.

(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State
from making any provision for reservation 3[in
matters of promotion, with consequential seniority,
to any class] or classes of posts in the services
under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of
the State, are not adequately represented in the
services under the State.

(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State
from considering any unfilled vacancies of a year
which are reserved for being filled up in that year in
accordance with any provision for reservation made
under clause (4) or clause (4A) as a separate class of
vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or
years and such class of vacancies shall not be
considered together with the vacancies of the year in
which they are being filled up for determining the
ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on total number
of vacancies of that year.

(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of
any law which provides that the incumbent of anPage 73 of 107office in connection with the affairs of any religious
or denominational institution or any member of the
governing body thereof shall be a person professing
a particular religion or belonging to a particular
denomination.

xxx          xxx             xxxArticle 46.Promotion of educational and
economic interests of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections ­
The State shall promote with special care the
educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and
shall protect them from social injustice and all forms
of exploitation.

xxx          xxx             xxxArticle 244.Administration of Scheduled Areas
and Tribal Areas ­ (1) The provisions of the Fifth
Schedule shall apply to the administration and
control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes
in any State 1*** other than 2[the States of
Assam3[,4[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram].

(2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply
to the administration of the tribal areas in 2[the
States of Assam 3[,5[Meghalaya, Tripura and
Mizoram]

      xxx          xxx             xxxArticle 246.Subject­matter of laws made by
Parliament and by the Legislatures of States ­
(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3),
Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in
the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to
as the “Union List”).

(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3),
Parliament, and, subject to clause (1), the
Legislature of any State 1*** also, have power to
make laws with respect to any of the mattersPage 74 of 107enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule (in
this Constitution referred to as the “Concurrent
List”).

(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of
any State 1*** has exclusive power to make laws for
such State or any part thereof with respect to any of
the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the
“State List”).

(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect
to any matter for any part of the territory of India not
included 2[in a State] notwithstanding that such
matter is a matter enumerated in the State List.

xxx          xxx              xxxArticle 254.Inconsistency between laws made
by Parliament and laws made by the
Legislatures of States ­ (1) If any provision of a
law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant
to any provision of a law made by Parliament which
Parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision
of an existing law with respect to one of the matters
enumerated in the Concurrent List, then, subject to
the provisions of clause (2), the law made by
Parliament, whether passed before or after the law
made by the Legislature of such State, or, as the
case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the
law made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the
extent of the repugnancy, be void.

(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State
1*** with respect to one of the matters enumerated
in the Concurrent List contains any provision
repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made
by Parliament or an existing law with respect to that
matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of
such State shall, if it has been reserved for the
consideration of the President and has received his
assent, prevail in that State:

(2) The Governor may make regulations for the peace
and good government of any area in a State which is
for the time being a Scheduled Area. In particularPage 76 of 107and without prejudice to the generality of the
           foregoing power, such regulations may—

(a) prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or
                 among members of the Scheduled Tribes in
                 such area;

(b) regulate the allotment of land to members
                 of the Scheduled Tribes in such area;

(c) regulate the carrying on of business as
                 money­lender by persons who lend money to
                 members of the Scheduled Tribes in such
                 area.

(3) In making any such regulation as is referred to in
           sub­paragraph      (2)  of   this   paragraph,     the
           Governor1*** may repeal or amend any Act of
           Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or any
           existing law which is for the time being applicable to
           the area in question.

(4) All regulations made under this paragraph shall
           be submitted forthwith to the President and, until
           assented to by him, shall have no effect.

           (5) No regulation shall be made under this
           paragraph unless the Governor making the
           regulation has, in the case where there is a Tribes
           Advisory Council for the State, consulted such
           Council.

17.2. As   perArticle     246(1),      notwithstanding        anything

     contained in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament shall have

     exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the

     matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule

     (Union List). As perArticle 246(2), notwithstanding

     anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, subject to

     clause (1), the Legislature of any State also shall havePage 77 of 107power to make laws with respect to any of the matters

enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule

(Concurrent List). As perArticle 254of the Constitution

of India, if any provision of law made by the Legislature

of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made

by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact,

or to any provision of an existing law with respect to

one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List,

then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law

made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the

law made by the Legislature of such State, or, as the

case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law

made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the extent

of the repugnancy, be void. Thus, as per the aforesaid

Constitutional provisions, law made by the Parliament

is supreme and shall prevail and every State/State

Legislature   is   bound    by         the   law   made     by    the

Parliament.   However,      paragraph          5   of   the      Fifth

Schedule to the Constitution of India is an exception.

Notwithstanding     the     aforesaid         provisions,     giving

supremacy to the law made by the Parliament, thePage 78 of 107Governor may direct that any particular Act of

     Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall not

     apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the

     State or shall apply to a Scheduled Area or any part

     thereof in the State subject to such exceptions and

     modifications as he may specify in the notification.

     Thus, the expression “notwithstanding anything in this

     Constitution” is related to the Constitutional provisions

     regarding the supremacy of the law made by the

     Parliament or State Legislature. This aspect shall be

     discussed   herein       below        while   considering   the

     submissions made on behalf of the appellants herein

     regarding paragraph 5(1) of the Fifth Schedule to the

     Constitution of India.

17.3. Therefore, the short question which is posed for the

     consideration of this Court is, whether, in exercise of

     powers conferred under paragraph 5(1) of the Fifth

     Schedule to the Constitution, the Governor can make

     provisions for 100% reservation in the scheduled Areas

     / Districts which may affect the rights of the citizensPage 79 of 107guaranteed under Part III, more particularly, underArticle 16 (2)of the Constitution of India? Whether

      such reservation would not be hit byArticle 13of the

      Constitution of India?

18.   Identical question came to be considered by the

      Constitutional Bench of this Court in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra). Before this Court

      the Governor of State of Andhra Pradesh issued GO in

      exercise of powers under paragraph 5(1) of the

      Schedule 5 of the Constitution of India, directing the

      posts of teachers in educational institutions in the

      scheduled tribe areas shall be reserved for Scheduled

      Tribes only notwithstanding anything contained in any

      other order or rule or law in force. Several questions

      were referred to the Constitution Bench. The following

      questions were ultimately framed for consideration by

      the Constitutional Bench:

19.1. Thus, in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra), after considering the relevant Constitutional

    provisions in detail including the powers of the

    Governor conferred in para 5(1) of the Fifth Schedule

    of the Constitution of India, it is ultimately observed

    and held as under:

Question No.3: The notification in question cannot
            be treated as classification made underArticle
            16(1).Once the reservation has been provided to
            Scheduled Tribes underArticle 16(4), no such
            power can be exercised underArticle 16(1).The
            notification is violative ofArticles 14and16(4)of
            the Constitution of India.

Question No.4 : The conditions of eligibility in the
            notification with a cut­off date i.e. 26­1­1950, to
            avail the benefits of reservation, is unreasonable
            and arbitrary one.”

20.   Applying law laid down by the Constitution Bench of

      this Court in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra), to the facts of the case on hand, the

      impugned Order/ Notification No.5938 and the Order

      No.5939 dated 14.07.2016 providing 100% reservation

      for   the   local   residents        of   concerned   Scheduled

      Districts/ Areas only can be said to be


      (1) beyond the scope and ambit of powers conferred

      upon the Governor under para 5(1) of the Fifth

      Schedule of the Constitution of India;Page 89 of 107(2) 100% reservation provided for the local residents of

      the concerned Scheduled Districts / Areas only would

      be violative ofArticle 16(2)of the Constitution of India

      and affecting rights of the other candidates / citizens

      of non­scheduled areas / Districts guaranteed under

      Part III of the Constitution of India;

(3) the exercise of powers by the Governor under para

      5(1) of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of India

      modifying Recruitment Rules, 2015 which are framed

      underArticle 309of the Constitution of India which

      can be said to be subordinate legislation and cannot

      be said to be an Act or the Law made by the

      Parliament and / or State Legislature is beyond the

      scope and ambit of Governor’s power under para 5(1)

      of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of India.

21.   The submission on behalf of the appellants and State

      that the decision of this Court in the case ofChebrolu

      Leela Prasad Rao(supra) shall not be applicable to

      the facts of the case on hand inasmuch as in the said

      case there was 100% reservation for Scheduled TribePage 90 of 107candidates which was held to be violating the rights of

the other reserved category candidates also and that

the decision of this Court in the case ofChebrolu

Leela    Prasad   Rao(supra)          is     required    to    be

reconsidered is concerned has no substance. What is

required to be considered is the ratio decidendi and

lawlaid down bythis Court. There is clear lawlaid

down byConstitution Bench of this Court as noted

above. The decision of the Constitution Bench which

is     rendered   after      considering               the   relevant

constitutional provisions and a number of decisions of

this Court is as such binding on us. It cannot be said

that the relevant Constitutional provisions and/or

binding decisions of this Court have not been dealt

with    and/or    considered          by        this    Court.The

Constitutional Bench decision of this Court in the

case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra) also

cannot be said to be per incuriam                  ignoring and/or

taking a contrary view than any of the binding

decision of this Court. As such and as observed hereinPage 91 of 107above, we reiterate that we are bound by the lawlaid

      down bythis Court, more particularly, a Constitution

      Bench decision of this Court.We see no reason not to

      follow the binding Constitution Bench decision of this

      Court in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra).We see no reason to take a different view than

      the view taken by the Constitution Bench of this court

      in the case ofChebrolu Leela Prasad Rao(supra). We

      also see no reason to refer the matter to a Larger

      Bench as prayed by some of the counsel appearing on

      behalf of the appellants – candidates belonging to the

      Scheduled Areas/ Districts.

22.   One other submission which is made by the learned

      Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State

      before the High Court was that in order to overcome

      the factors of low human development indices,

      backwardness, poverty etc., in the scheduled districts

      and to secure justice ­ social, economic and political,

      the notification was issued by the Governor of the

      State for protecting the interests of the residents inPage 92 of 107the scheduled districts. That even otherwise, it would

be of immense benefit to the school­going children in

the scheduled districts, if they are taught in their own

tribal language by the local teachers, than the

outsiders, who may not be well conversant with the

local language.     At the outset, it is required to be

noted that such submission was not pressed into

service heavily by any of the counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellants before the High Court.

However, it is to be noted that in the case ofChebrolu

Leela Prasad Rao(supra) the Constitution Bench of

this Court also considered the very submission and

negated the same by observing in para 130 and 131

as under:

26.3. In the present case, impugned Notification / Order is

     of the year 2016. The TGT recruitment process was

     initiated vide advertisement dated 28.12.2016 as

     modified on 04.02.2017 and same came to be

     challenged during the pendency of the recruitment

     process in the year 2017 itself. It is also required to be

     noted that by order dated 21.2.2019 the Division

     Bench of the High Court directed that notice be

     published in the daily newspapers having wide

     circulation about institution of the writ petition so

     that the person interested may intervene in the writ

     petition. Pursuant to such notice, several interlocutory

     applications/intervener applications came to be filed,

     which came to be allowed by the High Court.

     Thereafter, by order dated 18.09.2019, taking into

     consideration    the      question     of   Constitutional

     importance involved in the matters, the Division

     Bench of the High Court referred the matter to bePage 101 of 107decided by a Larger Bench. By the same order dated

18.09.2019,        the    High      Court      stayed      the   further

implementation           and    operation       of   the     impugned

Notification   No.5938           and        Order    No.5939        dated

14.7.2016, subject to the appointments already made,

if any. Thus, from the aforesaid it can be seen that the

original writ petitioners are always vigilant and

diligent and approached the High Court at the first

available    opportunity.           Their     valuable       right    for

consideration of their cases for appointment in the

Scheduled Districts / Areas have been taken away.

They have been successful before the High Court.

Therefore, in the facts and circumstance of the case,

the decision relied upon on behalf of the appellants to

make impugned judgment and order passed by the

High Court prospectively shall not be applicable to the

facts   of   the    case       on    hand.     In    the    facts    and

circumstances of the case, the prayer on behalf of the

appellants herein to make the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court applicablePage 102 of 107prospectively,   deserves      to     be    rejected     and   is

      accordingly rejected.

27.   However, at the same time and in the facts and

      circumstances of the case and more particularly, by

      quashing and setting aside the appointments already

      made there is a likelihood of more complication which

      would not be in the larger public interest. Hence, we

      are of the opinion that this is a fit case to mould the

      relief. Apart from the fact that the appellants herein –

      selected   candidates    belonging         to   the    Scheduled

      Districts/Areas are already working since last about

      three years, in case appointments already made are

      not protected then thousands of schools in the State

      of Jharkhand would be without teachers and the

      ultimate sufferers would be the children of tribal

      areas. In view of the impugned judgment and order

      passed by the High Court, by which, the High Court

      has held all the appointments made in Scheduled

      Districts/Areas illegal and has further directed to go

      for fresh recruitment, the State will have to undergoPage 103 of 107fresh   recruitment       process        which      may      take

considerable time and, in the meantime, there shall be

vacancies and number of schools in the tribal areas

shall be without teachers. Therefore, the Court has to

strike a balance between the rights of the original writ

petitioners   as   well   as     persons/teachers          already

appointed (whose appointments are held to be illegal)

and also the public interest. Hence, we are of the

opinion that while moulding the relief, instead of

initiating a fresh recruitment process, if directions are

issued for preparation of fresh selection list based on

revised merit and based on already published cut off

obtained by the last selected candidate in each TGT

subject against respective categories., it will meet ends

of justice and striking the balance between the

competing rights so that persons already appointed

may not have to lose their employment/job and at the

same time the candidates belonging to the non­

Scheduled     Districts/Areas          may   also    get     their

opportunity for appointment as a teacher on merits in

the Scheduled Districts/Areas. We are of the view thatPage 104 of 107no useful purpose will be served to go in for fresh/de

      novo recruitment process as directed by the High

      Court in the impugned judgment and order.

28.   In view of the above discussion and for the reasons

      stated above, we uphold the common impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court

      declaring   the    impugned        Notification/Order    dated

      14.07.2016    as    unconstitutional       and   ultra   viresArticles 14, 16(2), 16(3)and35(a­i)of the Constitution

      of India. We are in complete agreement with the view

      taken by the High Court. Present Appeals challenging

      the impugned common judgment and order passed by

      the High Court are hereby dismissed to the aforesaid

      extent.

However, at the same time, the directions issued

      by the High Court in the impugned judgment and

      order while setting aside all the appointments made

      pursuant to the Notification / Order dated 14.07.2016

      and Advertisement No.21 of 2016 dated 28.12.2016 as

      modified on 04.12.2017 and to go in for fresh/de novoPage 105 of 107recruitment process for the Scheduled Areas/Districts

is hereby modified. It is now directed that instead of

fresh/de novo recruitment process by setting aside the

appointments    already      made      in   the    Scheduled

Districts/Areas, the State shall revise the merit list

based on the already published cut off obtained by the

last selected candidates in each TGT subject against

the respective categories with respect to entire State

and respective candidates belonging to the non­

Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Areas (Districts) shall

be adjusted accordingly on the basis of individual

merit of the candidates. The present directions are

issued   considering      the        peculiar     facts   and

circumstances of the case and more particularly

considering the fact that there are already vacant

posts of teachers in the State (in both Scheduled and

non­Scheduled Area). We are of the view that if the

appointments already made are set aside and fresh de

novo recruitment process for such posts is initiated, a

number of schools in the Scheduled Areas shall be

without any teacher which may ultimately affect largerPage 106 of 107public interest and education of concerned children in

    the Scheduled Areas.

Present direction is issued in exercise of powers

    underArticle 142of the Constitution of India in the

    larger public interest of Scheduled Areas/Districts.


        Present    appeals     are        partly   allowed   to   the

    aforesaid extent modifying the impugned common

    judgment and order passed by the High Court as

    observed herein above.

In the facts and circumstances of the case, there

    shall be no order as to costs.

……………………………….J.
                                       [M.R. SHAH]


                                     ……………………………….J.
                                       [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
NEW DELHI;

AUGUST 02, 2022Page 107 of 107