--- Judgment Metadata ---
Title: Shayara Bano vs Union Of India And Ors. Ministry Of Women ... on 22 August, 2017
Document ID: 115701246
Source URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/115701246/
Court: Supreme Court of India
Bench: Bench:S. Abdul Nazeer,Uday Umesh Lalit,Rohinton Fali Nariman,Kurian Joseph,Jagdish Singh Khehar
Date of Judgment: 22 August, 2017
Petitioner(s): Shayara Bano
Respondent(s): Union Of India And Ors. Ministry Of Women ...
Citations: Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 SUPREME COURT 4609, AIR 2018 SC (CIVIL) 1169, (2017) 179 ALLINDCAS 104 (SC), (2017) 179 ALLINDCAS 104, (2017) 2 MARRILJ 247, 2017 (3) CRIMES 281 LN, (2017) 3 CURCC 82, 2017 (3) KCCR SN 254 (SC), (2017) 3 KER LJ 16, 2017 (3) KLT SN 87 (SC), (2017) 4 CAL HN 60, (2017) 4 JCR 69 (SC), (2017) 5 ALL WC 4353, (2017) 5 BOM CR 481, (2017) 6 MAD LJ 378, 2017 (9) ADJ 1 NOC, (2017) 9 SCALE 178, 2017 (9) SCC 1, (2018) 1 JCR 108 (SC), 242 (2017) DLT 1 (CN)(SC), AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 1169

--- Judgment Content ---

Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Member Services--Sign up todayand get free trial for one month.

KURIAN, J.:

2. Application of Personal law to
       Muslims. – Notwithstanding any custom or
       usage to the contrary, in all questions (save
       questions relating to agricultural land)575859284regarding     intestate   succession,   special
  property of females, including personal
  property inherited or obtained under contract
  or gift or any other provision of Personal Law,
  marriage, dissolution of marriage, including
  talaq, ila, zihar, lian, khula and mubaraat,
  maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts,
  trusts and trust properties, and wakfs (other
  than charities and charitable institutions and
  charitable and religious endowments) the rule
  of decision in cases where the parties are
  Muslims shall be Muslim Personal Law
  (Shariat).

(Emphasis supplied)

4. After   the   1937   Act,   in   respect         of    the

   enumerated subjects underSection 2regarding

   “marriage, dissolution of marriage, including

   talaq”, the law that is applicable to Muslims

   shall be only their personal law namely Shariat.

   Nothing   more,   nothing    less.     It   is   not    a

   legislation regulating talaq. In contradistinction,The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939provides for the grounds for dissolution of

   marriage. So is the case with theHindu

   Marriage Act, 1955. The 1937 Act simply makes

   Shariat applicable as the rule of decision in the

   matters enumerated insection 2. Therefore,

   while talaq is governed by Shariat, the specific285grounds and procedure for talaq have not been

  codified in the 1937 Act.

5. In that view of the matter, I wholly agree with

  the learned Chief Justice that the 1937 Act is

  not a legislation regulating talaq. Consequently,

  I respectfully disagree with the stand taken by

  Nariman, J. that the 1937 Act is a legislation

  regulating triple talaq and hence, the same can

  be tested on the anvil ofArticle 14.However,

  on the pure question of law that a legislation,

  be it plenary or subordinate, can be challenged

  on the ground of arbitrariness, I agree with the

  illuminating exposition of law by Nariman, J. I

  am    also   of   the   strong    view      that   the

  Constitutional    democracy      of     India   cannot

  conceive of a legislation which is arbitrary.

6. Shariat, having been declared to be Muslim

  Personal Law by the 1937 Act, we have to

  necessarily see what Shariat is. This has been

  beautifully explained by the renowned author,

  Asaf A.A. Fyzee in his book Outlines of286Muhammadan Law, 5th Edition, 2008 at

        page 10.60


       “…What is morally beautiful that must be
       done; and what is morally ugly must not be
       done. That is law or Shariat and nothing else
       can be law. But what is absolutely and
       indubitably beautiful, and what is absolutely
       and indubitably ugly? These are the
       important legal questions; and who can
       answer them? Certainly not man, say the
       Muslim legists. We have the Qur’an which is
       the very word of God. Supplementary to it we
       have Hadith which are the Traditions of the
       Prophet- the records of his actions and his
       sayings- from which we must derive help and
       inspiration in arriving at legal decisions. If
       there is nothing either in the Qur’an or in the
       Hadith to answer the particular question
       which is before us, we have to follow the
       dictates of secular reason in accordance with
       certain definite principles. These principles
       constitute the basis of sacred law or Shariat
       as the Muslim doctors understand it. And it is
       these fundamental juristic notions which we
       must try to study and analyse before we
       approach the study of the Islamic civil law as
       a whole, or even that small part of it which in
       India is known as Muslim law.”

7. There are four sources for Islamic law- (i) Quran

(ii) Hadith (iii) Ijma (iv) Qiyas. The learned

        author has rightly said that the Holy Quran is

        the “first source of law”. According to the

        learned author, pre-eminence is to be given to60287the Quran. That means, sources other than the

          Holy Quran are only to supplement what is

          given in it and to supply what is not provided

          for. In other words, there cannot be any Hadith,

          Ijma or Qiyas against what is expressly stated

          in the Quran.    Islam cannot be anti-Quran.

          According to Justice Bader Durrez Ahmad inMasroor Ahmed v. State (NCT of Delhi) &

          Another61:

8. It is in that background that I make an attempt

          to see what the Quran states on talaq. There is

          reference to talaq in three Suras- in Sura II

          while dealing with social life of the community,61288in Sura IV while dealing with decencies of family

   life and in Sura LXV while dealing explicitly with

   talaq.

9. Sura LXV of the Quran deals with talaq. It reads

   as follows:

And take for witness289Two persons from among you,
Endued with justice,
And establish the evidence
(As) before God. Such
Is the admonition given
To him who believes
In God and the Last Day.

And for those who fear
God, He (ever) prepares
A way out,

3. And He provides for him
From (sources) he never
Could imagine. And if
Any one puts his trust
In God, sufficient is (God)
For him. For God will
Surely accomplish His purpose :

4. Such of your women
As have passed the age
Of monthly courses, for them
The prescribed period, if ye
Have any doubts, is
Three months, and for those
Who have no courses
(It is the same):

5. That is the Command
Of God, which He
Has sent down to you :

6. Let the women live
          (In ‘iddat) in the same
          Style as ye live,
          According to your means :

7. Let the man of means
          Spend according to
          His means : and the man
          Whose resources are restricted,
          Let him spend according
          To what God has given him.

God puts no burden
          On any person beyond
          What He has given him.

After a difficulty, God
          Will soon grant relief.”

Verse 35 in Sura IV of the Quran speaks on arbitration for
reconciliation-

“35. If ye fear a breach
          Between them twain,
          Appoint (two) arbiters,
          One from his family,
          And the other from hers;

If they wish for peace,291God will cause
           Their reconciliation:

Nor is it lawful for them
         To hide what God
         Hath created in their wombs,
         If they have faith
         In God and the Last Day.

And their husbands
         Have the better right
         To take them back
         In that period, if
         They wish for reconciliation.

And women shall have rights
         Similar to the rights
         Against them, according
         To what is equitable;

But men have a degree
         (of advantage) over them.

And God is Exalted in Power,
                                   Wise.”

         “229. A divorce is only292Permissible twice: after that,
The parties should either hold
Together on equitable terms,
Or separate with kindness.

It is not lawful for you,
(Men), to take back
Any of your gifts (from your wives),
Except when both parties
Fear that they would be
Unable to keep the limits
Ordained by God.

If ye (judges) do indeed
Fear that they would be
Unable to keep the limits
Ordained by God,
There is no blame on either
Of them if she give
Something for her freedom.

These are the limits
Ordained by God;

So do not transgress them
If any do transgress
The limits ordained by God,
Such persons wrong
(Themselves as well as others).

230. So if a husband
Divorces his wife (irrevocably),
He cannot, after that,
Re-marry her until
After she has married
Another husband and
He has divorced her.

In that case there is
No blame on either of them
If they re-unite, provided
They feel that they
Can keep the limits
Ordained by God.

Such other limits
Ordained by God,
Which He makes plain
To those who understand.

231. When ye divorce293Women, and they fulfill
     The term of their (‘Iddat),
     Either take them back
     On equitable terms
     Or set them free
     On equitable terms;

But do not take them back
     To injure them, (or) to take
     Undue advantage;

If anyone does that,
     He wrongs his own soul.

Do not treat God’s Signs
     As a jest,
     But solemnly rehearse
     God’s favours on you,
     And the fact that He
     Sent down to you
     The Book
     And Wisdom,
     For your instruction.

And fear God,
     And know that God
     Is well acquainted
     With all things.”62

10.   These instructive verses do not require any

       interpretative exercise. They are clear and

       unambiguous as far as talaq is concerned. The

       Holy    Quran    has    attributed     sanctity     and

       permanence      to     matrimony.      However,      in

       extremely    unavoidable     situations,    talaq    is

       permissible. But an attempt for reconciliation

       and if it succeeds, then revocation are the

       Quranic essential steps before talaq attains62294finality.63 In triple talaq, this door is closed,

       hence, triple talaq is against the basic tenets of

       the Holy Quran and consequently, it violates

       Shariat.

11.   The above view has been endorsed by

       various High Courts, finally culminating in

       Shamim Ara by this Court which has since

       been taken as the law for banning triple talaq.Interestingly, prior to Shamim Ara, Krishna

       Iyer, J. inFuzlunbi v. K Khader Vali and

       Another64, while in a three judge bench in this

       Court, made a very poignant observation on the

       erroneous approach of Batchelor, J. inSarabai

       v. Rabiabai65on the famous comment “good in

       law, though bad in theology”. To quote:

12.   More than two decades later, Shamim Ara

       has referred to, as already noted above, the

       legal perspective across the country on the

       issue of triple talaq starting with the decision of

       the Calcutta High Court inFurzund Hossein v.

       Janu    Bibee66in   1878   and    finally,   after

       discussing two decisions of the Gauhati High

       Court namelyJiauddin Ahmed v. Anwara

       Begum67and        Rukia Khatun v. Abdul

       Khalique Laskar68, this Court held as follows-


       “13.There is yet another illuminating and
       weighty judicial opinion available in two
       decisions of the Gauhati High Court recorded
       by Baharul Islam, J. (later a Judge of the
       Supreme Court of India) sitting singly inJiauddin Ahmed v. Anwara Begum(1981) 1
       Gau LR 358 and later speaking for the
       Division Bench in Rukia Khatun v.Abdul
       Khalique Laskar (1981) 1 Gau LR 375.InJiauddin Ahmedcase a plea of previous666768296divorce i.e. the husband having divorced the
wife on some day much previous to the date
of filing of the written statement in the Court
was taken and upheld. The question posed
before the High Court was whether there has
been valid talaq of the wife by the husband
under the Muslim law. The learned Judge
observed that though marriage under the
Muslim law is only a civil contract yet the
rights and responsibilities consequent upon it
are of such importance to the welfare of
humanity, that a high degree of sanctity is
attached to it. But inspite of the sacredness
of the character of the marriage tie, Islam
recognizes the necessity, in exceptional
circumstances, of keeping the way open for
its dissolution (para 6). Quoting in the
judgment several Holy Quranic verses and
from        commentaries       thereon        by
well-recognized scholars of great eminence,
the learned Judge expressed disapproval of
the statement that "the whimsical and
capricious divorce by the husband is good in
law, though bad in theology" and observed
that such a statement is based on the
concept that women were chattel belonging
to men, which the Holy Quran does not brook.
The correct law of talaq as ordained by the
Holy Quran is that talaq must be for a
reasonable cause and be preceded by
attempts at reconciliation between the
husband and the wife by two arbiters - one
from the wife's family and the other from the
husband's; if the attempts fail, ‘ talaq’ may be
effected. (para 13).In Rukia Khatun case, the
Division Bench stated that the correct law of
talaq as ordained by the Holy Quran, is: (i)
that 'talaq' must be for a reasonable cause;
and (ii) that it must be preceded by an297attempt of reconciliation between the
       husband and the wife by two arbiters, one
       chosen by the wife from her family and the
       other by the husband from his. If their
       attempts fail, 'talaq' may be effected. The
       Division Bench expressly recorded its dissent
       from the Calcutta and Bombay views which,
       in their opinion, did not lay down the correct
       law.

14. We are in respectful agreement with the
       above said observations made by the learned
       Judges of High Courts….”

                                  (Emphasis supplied)

13.   There is also a fruitful reference to two

       judgments of the Kerala High Court - one of

       Justice Krishna Iyer inA. Yousuf Rawther v.

       Sowramma69and the other of Justice V. Khalid

       in Mohd. Haneefa v. Pathummal Beevi70. No

       doubt, Sowaramma was not a case on triple

       talaq, however, the issue has been discussed in

       the judgment in paragraph 7 which has also

       been quoted in Shamim Ara.

“..The view that the Muslim husband enjoys
       an arbitrary, unilateral power to inflict instant
       divorce does not accord with Islamic
       injunctions. …It is a popular fallacy that a
       Muslim male enjoys, under the Quoranic law,
       unbridled authority to liquidate the marriage.
       ‘The whole Quoran expressly forbids a man to6970298seek pretexts for divorcing his wife, so long
  as she remains faithful and obedient to him,
  "if they (namely, women) obey you, then do
  not seek a way against them”.’ (Quoran
  IV:34). The Islamic law gives to the man
  primarily the faculty of dissolving the
  marriage, if the wife, by her indocility or her
  bad character, renders the married life
  unhappy; but in the absence of serious
  reasons, no man can justify a divorce, either
  in the eye of religion or the law. If he
  abandons his wife or puts her away in simple
  caprice, he draws upon himself the divine
  anger, for the curse of God, said the Prophet,
  rests on him who repudiates his wife
  capriciously."    ….Commentators      on    the
  Quoran have rightly observed - and this
  tallies with the law now administered in some
  Muslim countries like Iraq -that the husband
  must satisfy the court about the reasons for
  divorce. However, Muslim law, as applied in
  India, has taken a course contrary to the
  spirit of what the Prophet or the Holy Quoran
  laid down and the same misconception
  vitiates the law dealing with the wife's right
  to divorce…"

14.   Khalid, J. has been more vocal in Mohd.

  Haneefa:

15.   After   a      detailed        discussion     on     the

  aforementioned cases, it has been specifically

  held   by   this    Court     in    Shamim        Ara,    at

  paragraph 15 that “…there are no reasons

  substantiated in justification of talaq and no

  plea or proof that any effort at reconciliation

  preceded the talaq.” It has to be particularly

  noted that this conclusion by the Bench in

  Shamim      Ara      is   made        after     “respectful

  agreement” with Jiauddin Ahmed that “talaq

  must be for a reasonable cause and be

  preceded by attempts at reconciliation between

  the husband and the wife by two arbiters — one

  from the wife’s family and the other from the

  husband’s; if the attempts fail, ‘talaq’ may be

  effected.” In the light of such specific findings

  as to how triple talaq is bad in law on account

  of not following the Quranic principles, it cannot

  be said that there is no ratio decidendi on triple

  talaq in Shamim Ara.

300

16.   Shamim Ara has since been understood by

       various High Courts across the country as the

       law deprecating triple talaq as it is opposed to

       the tenets of the Holy Quran. Consequently,

       triple talaq lacks the approval of Shariat.

17.   The High Court of Andhra Pradesh, inZamrud Begum v. K. Md. Haneefand

       another71, is one of the first High Courts to

       affirm the view adopted in Shamim Ara. The

       High Court, after referring to Shamim Ara and

       all the other decisions mentioned therein, held

       in paragraphs 13 and 17 as follows:

6. The only thing to be further considered in
       this case is whether the divorce alleged to
       have been effected by the husband by
       pronouncement of talaq on 23-7-1999 is
       proved or not. The mere pronouncement of76304talaq three times even in the presence of the
  wife is not sufficient to effect a divorce under
  Mohammadan Law. As held by the Supreme
  Court inShamim Ara's case [2002 (3) KLT 537
  (SC)], there should be an attempt of
  mediation by two mediators; one on the side
  of the husband and the other on the side of
  the wife and only in case it was a failure that
  the husband is entitled to pronounce talaq to
  divorce the wife…”

                             (Emphasis supplied)

21.   In Masroor Ahmed, Justice Badar Durrez

  Ahmed, held as follows:

22.   As recently as in 2016, Mustaque, J. of the

       High Court of Kerala inNazeer @ Oyoor

       Nazeer v. Shemeema77, has inter alia referred

       to Shamim Ara and has disapproved triple

       talaq.

23.   Therefore, I find it extremely difficult to

       agree with the learned Chief Justice that the

       practice of triple talaq has to be considered

       integral   to   the   religious   denomination   in

       question and that the same is part of their

       personal law.

24.   To freely profess, practice and propagate

       religion of one’s choice is a Fundamental Right

       guaranteed under the Indian Constitution. That

       is subject only to the following- (1) public order,

       (2) health, (3) morality and (4) other provisions

       of Part III dealing with Fundamental Rights.

       UnderArticle 25 (2)of the Constitution of India,

       the State is also granted power to make law in

       two contingencies notwithstanding the freedom

       granted underArticle 25(1).Article 25 (2)states

       that “nothing in this Article shall affect the77306operation of any existing law or prevent the

State from making any law- (a) regulating or

restricting any economic, financial, political or

other secular activity which may be associated

with religious practice; (b) providing for social

welfare and reform or the throwing open of

Hindu religious institutions of a public character

to all classes and sections of Hindus.” Except to

the above extent, the freedom of religion under

the Constitution of India is absolute and on this

point, I am in full agreement with the learned

Chief Justice. However, on the statement that

triple talaq is an integral part of the religious

practice, I respectfully disagree. Merely because

a practice has continued for long, that by itself

cannot make it valid if it has been expressly

declared   to   be   impermissible.   The   whole

purpose of the 1937 Act was to declare Shariat

as the rule of decision and to discontinue

anti-Shariat practices with respect to subjects

enumerated inSection 2which include talaq.

Therefore, in any case, after the introduction of

the 1937 Act, no practice against the tenets of307Quran is permissible. Hence, there cannot be

  any Constitutional protection to such a practice

  and thus, my disagreement with the learned

  Chief Justice for the constitutional protection

  given to triple talaq. I also have serious doubts

  as to whether, even underArticle 142, the

  exercise     of   a   Fundamental        Right   can   be

  injuncted.

25.   When issues of such nature come to the

  forefront, the discourse often takes the form of

  pitting    religion   against    other    constitutional

  rights. I believe that a reconciliation between

  the same is possible, but the process of

  harmonizing different interests is within the

  powers of the legislature. Of course, this power

  has to be exercised within the constitutional

  parameters        without     curbing     the    religious

  freedom guaranteed under the Constitution of

  India. However, it is not for the Courts to direct

  for any legislation.

26.   Fortunately, this Court has done its part in

  Shamim        Ara.     I    expressly     endorse      and308re-iterate the law declared in Shamim Ara.

What is held to be bad in the Holy Quran cannot

        be good in Shariat and, in that sense, what is

        bad in theology is bad in law as well.

..……………………J.
                            (KURIAN JOSEPH)

New Delhi;

August 22, 2017.

309REPORTABLE

         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
           CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

        SUO MOTU WRIT (CIVIL) No. 2 of 2015

IN RE: MUSLIM WOMEN’S QUEST
FOR EQUALITY                …PETITIONER

                   VERSUS

JAMIAT ULMA-I-HIND & ORS.   ...RESPONDENTS

                    WITH

     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 118 of 2016

SHAYARA BANO                 …PETITONER

                   VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND ORS. MINISTRY
OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
SECRETARY AND ORS.         ...RESPONDENTS

                    WITH

     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 288 of 2016

AAFREEN REHMAN                  …PETITIONER

                   VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.       …RESPONDENTS

                    WITH

     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 327 of 2016

GULSHAN PARVEEN                 …PETITIONER

                   VERSUS


UNION OF INDIA REPRESENTED BY310THE SECRETARY AND ORS.                                 …
RESPONDENTS

                           WITH

         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 665 of 2016

ISHRAT JAHAN                           …PETITIONER

                         VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA MINISTRY OF
WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
REPRESENTED BY THE SECRETARY
AND ORS.                …RESPONDENTS

                           WITH

          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 43 of 2017

ATIYA SABRI                            …PETITIONER

                         VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA REPRESENTED
BY THE SECRETARY AND ORS. …RESPONDENTS



                             JUDGMENT



R.F. Nariman, J.

Having perused a copy of the learned Chief Justice’s

judgment,     I am in respectful disagreement with the

same.

1.   This matter has found its way to a Constitution

     Bench of this Court because of certain newspaper311articles which a Division Bench of this Court inPrakash v. Phulavati, (2016) 2 SCC 36, adverted

to, and then stated:

Reference was also made to observations
   inMadhu Kishwar v. State of Bihar, (1996)
   5 SCC 125 to the effect that the Court
   could at best advise and focus attention to
   the problem instead of playing an activist
   role.] It was observed that challenge to theMuslim Women (Protection of Rights on
   Divorce) Act, 1986was pending before the
   Constitution Bench and there was no
   reason to multiply proceedings on such an
   issue.

312

31. It was, thus, submitted that this aspect
       of the matter may be gone into by
       separately registering the matter as public
       interest litigation (PIL). We are of the view
       that the suggestion needs consideration in
       view of the earlier decisions of this Court.
       The issue has also been highlighted in
       recent articles appearing in the press on
       this subject. [The Tribune dated 24-9-2015
       “Muslim Women’s Quest for Equality” by
       Vandana Shukla and Sunday Express
       Magazine dated 4-10-2015 “In Her Court”
       by Dipti Nagpaul D’Souza.]

32. For this purpose, a PIL be separately
       registered and put up before the
       appropriate Bench as per orders of Hon’ble
       the Chief Justice of India.”

                               (at pages 53 and 55)

         Several writ petitions have thereafter been filed

and are before us seeking in different forms the same

relief – namely, that a Triple Talaq at one go by a

Muslim husband which severs the marital bond is bad

in constitutional law.

2.   Wide ranging arguments have been made by

     various counsel appearing for the parties. These

     have been referred to in great detail in the judgment

     of the learned Chief Justice.      In essence, the

     petitioners, supported by the Union of India, state

     that Triple Talaq is an anachronism in today’s day

     and age and, constitutionally speaking, is anathema.313Gender discrimination is put at the forefront of the

argument, and it is stated that even though Triple

Talaq may be sanctioned by the Shariat law as

applicable to Sunni Muslims in India, it is violative of

Muslim women’s fundamental rights to be found,

more particularly, inArticles 14, 15(1)and21of the

Constitution of India. Opposing this, counsel for the

Muslim Personal Board and others who supported

them, then relied heavily upon a Bombay High Court

judgment, beingState of Bombay v. Narasu Appa

Mali, AIR 1952 Bom 84, for the proposition that

personal   laws    are   beyond    the   pale   of   the

fundamental rights Chapter of the Constitution and

hence cannot be struck down by this Court.

According to them, in this view of the matter, this

Court should fold its hands and send Muslim women

and other women’s organisations back to the

legislature, as according to them, if Triple Talaq is to

be removed as a measure of social welfare and

reform underArticle 25(2), the legislature alone

should do so. To this, the counter argument of the

other side is that Muslim personal laws are not

being attacked as such. What is the subject matter314of attack in these matters is a statute, namely, theMuslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937(hereinafter   referred   to   as   the   “1937   Act”).

     According to them, Triple Talaq is specifically

     sanctioned by statutory law videSection 2of the

     1937 Act and what is sought for is a declaration thatSection 2of the 1937 Act is constitutionally invalid to

     the aforesaid extent. To this, the Muslim Personal

     Board states thatSection 2is not in order to apply

     the Muslim law of Triple Talaq, but is primarily

     intended to do away with custom or usage to the

     contrary, as the non-obstante clause inSection 2indicates.Therefore, according to them, the Muslim

     personal law of Triple Talaq operates of its own

     force and cannot be included inArticle 13(1)as

     “laws in force” as has been held inNarasu Appa(supra).

3.   The question, therefore, posed before this Court is

     finally in a very narrow compass. Triple Talaq alone

     is the subject matter of challenge – other forms of

     Talaq are not. The neat question that arises before

     this Court is, therefore, whether the 1937 Act can be

     said to recognize and enforce Triple Talaq as a rule315of law to be followed by the Courts in India and if not

     whetherNarasu Appa(supra) which states that

     personal laws are outsideArticle 13(1)of the

     Constitution is correct in law.

4.   Inasmuch as the Muslims in India are divided into

     two main sects, namely Sunnis and Shias, and this

     case pertains only to Sunnis as Shias do not

     recognize Triple Talaq, it is important to begin at the

     very beginning.

5.   In a most illuminating introduction to Mulla’s

     Principles of Mahomedan Law (16th Ed.) (1968),

     Justice Hidayatullah, after speaking about Prophet

     Mahomed, has this to say:

6.   It is in this historical setting that it is necessary to

     advert to the various sub-sects of the Sunnis. Four

     major sub-sects are broadly recognized schools of

     Sunni law.     They are the Hanafi school, Maliki

     school, Shafi’i school and Hanbali school.          The

     overwhelming majority of Sunnis in India follow the

     Hanafi school of law.         Mulla in Principles of

     Mahomedan Law (20th Ed.), pg. xix to xxi, has this to

     say about the Hanafi school:

7.   Needless to add, the Hanafi school has supported

     the practice of Triple Talaq amongst the Sunni

     Muslims in India for many centuries.

8.   Marriage in Islam is a contract, and like other

     contracts, may under certain circumstances, be

     terminated.    There is something astonishingly

     modern about this – no public declaration is a

     condition precedent to the validity of a Muslim

     marriage nor is any religious ceremony deemed

     absolutely essential, though they are usually carried319out.    Apparently, before the time of Prophet

     Mahomed, the pagan Arab was absolutely free to

     repudiate his wife on a mere whim, but after the

     advent of Islam, divorce was permitted to a man if

     his wife by her indocility or bad character renders

     marital life impossible.   In the absence of good

     reason, no man can justify a divorce for he then

     draws upon himself the curse of God.           Indeed,

     Prophet Mahomed had declared divorce to be the

     most disliked of lawful things in the sight of God.

     The reason for this is not far to seek.       Divorce

     breaks the marital tie which is fundamental to family

     life in Islam. Not only does it disrupt the marital tie

     between man and woman, but it has severe

     psychological and other repercussions on the

     children from such marriage.

9.          This then leads us to the forms of divorce

recognized in Islamic Law.       Mulla (supra), at pages

393-395, puts it thus:

When the marriage has not been
consummated, a talak in the ahsan form
may be pronounced even if the wife is in
her menstruation.

Where the wife has passed the age of
periods of menstruation the requirement of
a declaration during a tuhr is inapplicable;
furthermore, this requirement only applies
to a oral divorce and not a divorce in
writing.

Talak Ahsan is based on the following
verses of Holy Quran: “and the divorced
woman should keep themselves in waiting
for three courses.” (II:228).

“And those of your woman who despair
   of menstruation, if you have a doubt,
   their prescribed time is three months,
   and of those too, who have not had
   their courses.” (LXV: 4).

(2) Talak hasan- This consists of three
   pronouncements         made        during
   successive tuhrs, no intercourse taking
   place during any of the three tuhrs.

       The first pronouncement should be
made during a tuhr, the second during the
next tuhr, and the third during the
succeeding tuhr.

Talak Hasan is based on the following
Quranic injunctions:

Talak-ul-sunnat is of two kinds, namely, (1)
ahsan, that is, most proper, and (2) hasan,
that is, proper.      The talak-ul-biddat or
heretical divorce is good in law, though bad
in theology and it is the most common and
prevalent mode of divorce in this country,
including Oudh. In the case of talak ahsan
and talak hasan, the husband has an
opportunity of reconsidering his decision,
for the talak in both these cases does not
become absolute until a certain period has
elapsed (S.312), and the husband has the
option to revoke it before then. But the
talak-ul-biddat     becomes        irrevocable
immediately it is pronounced (S.312). The
essential feature of a talak-ul-biddat is its
irrevocability. One of tests of irrevocability
is the repetition three times of the formula322of divorce within one tuhr. But the triple
      repetition is not a necessary condition of
      talak-ul-biddat, and the intention to render a
      talak irrevocable may be expressed even
      by a single declaration. Thus if a man says
      “I have divorced you by a talak-ul-bain
      (irrevocable divorce)”, the talak is
      talak-ul-biddat or talak-i-badai and it will
      take effect immediately it is pronounced,
      though it may be pronounced but once.
      Here the use of the expression “bain”
      (irrevocable) manifests of itself the intention
      to effect an irrevocable divorce.”
                            [Emphasis Supplied]

10.        Another noted author, A.A.A. Fyzee, in his

book “Outlines of Muhammadan Law” (5 th Ed.), at

pages 120-122, puts it thus:

therefore not approved) – (i) three
      declarations (the so-called triple divorce) at
      one time, (ii) one irrevocable declaration
      (generally in writing).

The talaq al-sunna, most approved form
consists of one single pronouncement in a
period of tuhr (purity, i.e., when the woman
is free from her menstrual courses),
followed by abstinence from sexual
intercourse during that period of sexual
purity (tuhr) as well as during the whole of
the iddat. If any such intercourse takes
place during the periods mentioned, the
divorce is void and of no effect in Ithna
Ashari and Fatimi laws. It is this mode or
procedure which seems to have been
approved by the Prophet at the beginning
of his ministry and is consequently
regarded as the regular or proper and
orthodox form of divorce.

Where the parties have been away from
each other for a long time, or where the
wife is old and beyond the age of
menstruation, the condition of tuhr is
unnecessary.

A pronouncement made in the ashan form
is revocable during iddat. This period is
three months from the date of the
declaration or, if the woman is pregnant,
until delivery. The husband may revoke the
divorce at any time during the iddat. Such
revocation may be by express words or by
conduct.        Resumption of conjugal
intercourse is a clear case of revocation.
For instance, H pronounces a single
revocable talaq against his wife and then
says ‘I have retained thee’ or cohabits with
her, the divorce is revoked under Hanafi as
well as Ithna Ashari law.            After the
expiration of the iddat the divorce becomes
irrevocable.

A Muslim wife after divorce is entitled to
maintenance during the iddat, and so also
her child in certain circumstances.
The hasan form of talaq, also an approved
form but less approved than the first
(ahsan), consists of three successive
pronouncements during three consecutive
periods of purity (tuhr). Each of these324pronouncements should have been made
at a time when no intercourse has taken
place during that particular period of purity.
The hasan form of talaq requires some
explanation and a concrete illustration
should suffice.           The husband (H)
pronounces talaq on his wife (W) for the
first time during a period when W is free
from her menstrual courses. The husband
and wife had not come together during this
period of purity. This is the first talaq. H
resumes cohabitation or revokes this first
talaq in this period of purity. Thereafter in
the following period of purity, at a time
when no intercourse has taken place, H
pronounces the second talaq. This talaq is
again revoked by express words or by
conduct and the third period of purity is
entered into. In this period, while no
intercourse having taken place, H for the
third time pronounces the formula of
divorce.        This third pronouncement
operates in law as a final and irrevocable
dissolution of the marital tie. The marriage
is dissolved; sexual intercourse becomes
unlawful; iddat becomes incumbent;
remarriage between the parties becomes
impossible unless W lawfully marries
another husband, and that other husband
lawfully divorces her after the marriage has
been actually consummated.

Thus it is clear that in these two forms there
is a chance for the parties to be reconciled
by the intervention of friends or otherwise.
They are, therefore, the ‘approved’ forms
and are recognized both by Sunni and Shia
laws. The Ithna Ashari and the Fatimi
schools, however, do not recognize the
remaining two forms and thus preserve the
ancient conventions of the times of the
Law-giver.

The first, or ahsan, form is ‘most approved’
because the husband behaves in a
gentlemanly manner and does not treat the
wife as a chattel. The second is a form in325which the Prophet tried to put an end to a
      barbarous pre-Islamic practice.           This
      practice was to divorce a wife and take her
      back several times in order to ill-treat her.
      The Prophet, by the rule of the irrevocability
      of the third pronouncement, indicated
      clearly that such a practice could not be
      continued indefinitely. Thus if a husband
      really wished to take the wife back he
      should do so; if not, the third
      pronouncement after two reconciliations
      would operate as a final bar. These rules of
      law follow the spirit of the Quranic
      injunction: ‘when they have reached their
      term take them back in kindness or part
      from them in kindness’.

A disapproved form of divorce is talaq by
      triple    declarations     in   which    three
      pronouncements are made in a single tuhr,
      either in one sentence e.g. ‘I divorce thee
      triply or thrice’ or in three sentences ‘I
      divorce thee, I divorce thee, I divorce thee.’
      Such a talaq is lawful, although sinful, in
      Hanafi law; but in Ithna Ashari and the
      Fatimi laws it is not permissible. This is
      called talaq al-ba’in, irrevocable divorce.
      Another form of the disapproved divorce is
      a single, irrevocable pronouncement made
      either during the period of tuhr or even
      otherwise. This form is also called talaq
      al-ba’in and may be given in writing. Such
      a ‘bill of divorcement’ comes into operation
      immediately and severs the marital tie.
      This form is not recognized by the Ithna
      Ashari or the Fatimi schools.”
                              [Emphasis Supplied]

11.   It is at this stage that the 1937 Act needs

consideration. The Statement of Objects and Reasons

of this Act are as follows:

12.       It is a short Act consisting of 6 Sections. We

are directly concerned in these cases withSection 2.Section 2of the 1937 Act states:327

13.       A word as to the meaning of the expression

“Shariat”.A.A.A. Fyzee(supra), at pages 9-11,

describes “Shariat” as follows:

According to the Shariat religious
injunctions are of five kinds, al-ahkam
al-khamsah. Those strictly enjoined are
farz, and those strictly forbidden are haram.
Between them we have two middle
categories, namely, things which you are
advised to do (mandub), and things which
you are advised to refrain from (makruh)
and finally there are things about which
religion is indifferent (ja’iz).     The daily
prayers, five in number, are farz; wine is
haram; the addition prayers like those on330the Eid are mandub; certain kinds of fish
      are makruh; and there are thousands of
      ja’iz things such as travelling by air. Thus
      the Shariat is totalitarian; all human activity
      is embraced in its sovereign domain. This
      fivefold division must be carefully noted; for
      unless this is done it is impossible to
      understand the distinction between that
      which is only morally enjoined and that
      which is legally enforced. Obviously, moral
      obligation is quite a different thing from
      legal necessity and if in law these
      distinctions are not kept in mind error and
      confusion are the inevitable result.”

14.        It can be seen that the 1937 Act is a

pre-constitutional legislative measure which would fall

directly withinArticle 13(1)of the Constitution of India,

which reads as under:

15.       However, learned counsel for the Muslim

Personal Board as well as other counsel supporting

their stand have argued that, read in light of the

Objects and Reasons, the 1937 Act was not meant to

enforce Muslim personal law, which was enforceable

by itself through the Courts in India. The 1937 Act was

only meant, as the non-obstante clause inSection 2indicates, to do away with custom or usage which is

contrary to Muslim personal law.

16.       We are afraid that such a constricted reading

of the statute would be impermissible in law. True, the

Objects and Reasons of a statute throw light on the

background in which the statute was enacted, but it is

difficult to read the non-obstante clause ofSection 2as

governing the enacting part of the Section, or otherwise

it will become a case of the tail wagging the dog. A

similar attempt was made many years ago and rejected

inAswini Kumar Ghosh v. Arabinda Bose, 1953

SCR 1. This Court was concerned withSection 2of

the Supreme Court Advocates (Practice in High Courts)

Act, 1951.Section 2of the said Act read as follows:332

17.       The argument made before this Court was

that the non-obstante clause furnishes the key to the

proper interpretation of the scope of the Section and

the enacting clause must, therefore, be construed as

conferring only a right co-extensive with the disability

removed by the opening clause. This argument was

rejected by this Court as follows:

18.       It is, therefore, clear that all forms of Talaq

recognized and enforced by Muslim personal law are

recognized and enforced by the 1937 Act. This would

necessarily include Triple Talaq when it comes to the

Muslim personal law applicable to Sunnis in India.

Therefore, it is very difficult to accept the argument on

behalf of the Muslim Personal Board thatSection 2does not recognize or enforce Triple Talaq. It clearly

and obviously does both, because the Section makes

Triple Talaq “the rule of decision in cases where the

parties are Muslims”.

334

19.            As we have concluded that the 1937 Act is a

law made by the legislature before the Constitution

came into force, it would fall squarely within the

expression “laws in force” inArticle 13(3)(b)and would

be hit byArticle 13(1)if found to be inconsistent with

the provisions of Part III of the Constitution, to the

extent of such inconsistency.

20.            At this stage, it is necessary to refer to the

recognition of Triple Talaq as a legal form of divorce in

India, as applicable to Sunni Muslims.In an earlyBombaycase,Sarabai v. Rabiabai, (1906) ILR 30

Bom 537, Bachelor, J. referred to Triple Talaq and said

that “it is good in law though bad in theology”.In a

Privy Council decision in 1932, 5 years before the 1937

Act, namelyRashid Ahmad v. Anisa Khatun,

(1931-32) 59 IA 21: AIR 1932 PC 25, the Privy Council

was squarely called upon to adjudicate upon a Triple

Talaq. Lord Thankerton speaking for the Privy Council

put it thus:

21.        It is thus clear that it is this view of the law

which the 1937 Act both recognizes and enforces so as

to come within the purview ofArticle 13(1)of the

Constitution.

22.In this view of the matter, it is unnecessary for us to

decide whether the judgment inNarasu Appa(supra)

is good law.However, in a suitable case, it may be

necessary to have a re-look at this judgment in that the

definition of “law” and “laws in force” are both inclusive

definitions, and that at least one part of the judgment of

P.B. Gajendragadkar, J., (para 26), in which the

learned Judge opines that the expression “law” cannot

be read into the expression “laws in force” inArticle

13(3)is itself no longer good law – SeeSant Ram &

Ors. v. Labh Singh & Ors., (1964) 7 SCR 756.

23.        It has been argued somewhat faintly that

Triple Talaq would be an essential part of the Islamic

faith and would, therefore, be protected byArticle 25of

the Constitution of India.Article 25reads as follows:

Explanation I.—The wearing and carrying
      of kirpans shall be deemed to be included
      in the profession of the Sikh religion.
      Explanation II.—In sub-clause (b) of clause
      (2), the reference to Hindus shall be
      construed as including a reference to
      persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or
      Buddhist religion, and the reference to
      Hindu religious institutions shall be
      construed accordingly.”

24.       “Religion”   has   been    given    the   widest

possible meaning by this Court inCommissioner,

Hindu    Religious     Endowments,      Madras      v. Sri

Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt,

1954 SCR 1005 at 1023-1024. In this country,

therefore, atheism would also form part of “religion”.

But one important caveat has been entered by this

Court, namely, that only what is an essential religious

practice is protected underArticle 25.A few decisions338have laid down what constitutes an essential religious

practice.Thus, inJaved v. State of Haryana, 2003 (8)

SCC 369, this Court stated as under:

25.       Applying the aforesaid tests, it is clear that

Triple Talaq is only a form of Talaq which is permissible

in law, but at the same time, stated to be sinful by the

very Hanafi school which tolerates it.According to

Javed(supra), therefore, this would not form part of

any essential religious practice.Applying the test stated

inAcharya Jagdishwarananda(supra), it is equally

clear that the fundamental nature of the Islamic

religion, as seen through an Indian Sunni Muslim’s

eyes, will not change without this practice. Indeed,

Islam divides all human action into five kinds, as has

been stated by Hidayatullah, J. in his introduction to

Mulla (supra). There it is stated:

Wajib. Perhaps a little less compulsory than
              Fard but only slightly less so.

(ii)    Second degree: Masnun, Mandub and
        Mustahab: These are recommended actions.

(iii)   Third degree: Jaiz or Mubah: These are
        permissible actions as to which religion is
        indifferent.

(iv)    Fourth degree: Makruh:                  That       which    is
        reprobated as unworthy.

(v)     Fifth degree: Haram: That which is forbidden.”
        Obviously, Triple Talaq does not fall within the first

degree, since even assuming that it forms part of the

Koran,      Hadis    or   Ijmaa,    it     is     not      something

“commanded”.           Equally     Talaq        itself   is   not   a

recommended action and, therefore, Triple Talaq will

not fall within the second degree. Triple Talaq at best

falls within the third degree, but probably falls more

squarely within the fourth degree.                       It will be

remembered that under the third degree, Triple Talaq is

a permissible action as to which religion is indifferent.

Within the fourth degree, it is reprobated as unworthy.

We have already seen that though permissible in

Hanafi jurisprudence, yet, that very jurisprudence

castigates Triple Talaq as being sinful.                 It is clear,

therefore, that Triple Talaq forms no part ofArticle34225(1).This being the case, the submission on behalf

of the Muslim Personal Board that the ball must be

bounced back to the legislature does not at all arise in

thatArticle 25(2)(b)would only apply if a particular

religious practice is first covered underArticle 25(1)of

the Constitution.

26.        And this brings us to the question as to

when petitions have been filed underArticle 32of the

Constitution of India, is it permissible for us to state that

we will not decide an alleged breach of a fundamental

right, but will send the matter back to the legislature to

remedy such a wrong.

27.InPrem      Chand      Garg     v.    Excise

Commissioner, U.P., 1963 (Supp.) 1 SCR 885, this

Court held:

28.        We are heartened to note that in a recent

U.S. Supreme Court decision the same thing has been344said with respect to knocking at the doors of the U.S.

Supreme Court in order to vindicate a basic right. In

Obergefell v. Hodges, 135 S. Ct. 2584 at 2605,

decided on June 26, 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court put

it thus:

29.        However, counsel for the Muslim Personal

Board relied heavily on this Court’s decision inAhmedabad Women Action Group v. Union of India,

(1997) 3 SCC 573. This judgment refers to several

earlier decisions to hold that the declarations sought for

did not deserve disposal on merits, which involve

issues of State policy that courts ordinarily do not have345concern with.      This Court, therefore, declined to

entertain writ petitions that asked for very sweeping

reliefs   which,   interestingly   enough,    included    a

declaration of voidness as to “unilateral talaq”.This

Court referred in detail to the judgment of the Bombay

High Court inNarasu Appa(supra) in declining to

review Muslim personal law. However, when it came to

the challenge of a statutory enactment,Muslim Women

(Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986, this Court

did not wish to multiply proceedings in that behalf, as a

challenge was pending before a Constitution Bench

regarding the same.

30.        Hard as we tried, it is difficult to discover any

ratio in this judgment, as one part of the judgment

contradicts another part. If one particular statutory

enactment is already under challenge, there is no

reason why other similar enactments which were also

challenged should not have been disposed of by this

Court. Quite apart from the above, it is a little difficult

to appreciate such declination in the light ofPrem

Chand Garg(supra). This judgment, therefore, to the

extent that it is contrary to at least two Constitution346Bench decisions cannot possibly be said to be good

law.

31.        It is at this point that it is necessary to see

whether a fundamental right has been violated by the

1937 Act insofar as it seeks to enforce Triple Talaq as a

rule of law in the Courts in India.

32.Article 14of the Constitution of India is a

facet of equality of status and opportunity spoken of in

the Preamble to the Constitution. The Article naturally

divides itself into two parts- (1) equality before the law,

and (2) the equal protection of the law. Judgments of

this Court have referred to the fact that the equality

before law concept has been derived from the law in

the U.K., and the equal protection of the laws has been

borrowed from the 14th Amendment to the Constitution

of the United States of America.In a revealing

judgment, Subba Rao, J., dissenting, inState of U.P. v.

Deoman Upadhyaya, (1961) 1 SCR 14 at 34 further

went on to state that whereas equality before law is a

negative concept, the equal protection of the law has

positive content.   The early judgments of this Court

referred to the “discrimination” aspect ofArticle 14, and

evolved a rule by which subjects could be classified. If347the classification was “intelligible” having regard to the

object sought to be achieved, it would pass muster

under Article 14’s anti-discrimination aspect.Again,

Subba Rao, J., dissenting, inLachhman Das v. State

of Punjab, (1963) 2 SCR 353 at 395, warned that

overemphasis on the doctrine of classification or an

anxious and sustained attempt to discover some basis

for classification may gradually and imperceptibly

deprive the Article of its glorious content.     He referred

to the doctrine of classification as a “subsidiary rule”

evolved by courts to give practical content to the said

Article.

33.        In the pre-1974 era, the judgments of this

Court did refer to the “rule of law” or “positive” aspect ofArticle 14, the concomitant of which is that if an action

is found to be arbitrary and, therefore, unreasonable, it

would negate the equal protection of the law contained

inArticle 14and would be struck down on this ground.InS.G. Jaisinghani v. Union of India, (1967) 2 SCR

703, this Court held:

34.        Similarly, again in the context of anArticle 14challenge to service rules, this Court held inState of349Mysore v. S.R. Jayaram, (1968) 1 SCR 349 as

follows:

35.In the celebratedIndira Gandhi v. Raj

Narainjudgment, reported in 1975 Supp SCC 1,Article

329-Asub-clauses (4) and (5) were struck down by a

Constitution Bench of this Court.Applying the newly

evolved    basic   structure   doctrinelaid    down   inKesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, (1973) 4350SCC 225, Ray, C.J. struck down the said amendment

thus:

36.         This passage is of great significance in that

the amendment was said to be bad because the

constituent power did not have any law to apply to the

case, and this being so, the rule of law contained in the

Constitution would be violated. This rule of law has an

obvious reference toArticle 14of the Constitution, in

that it would be wholly arbitrary to decide the case

without applying any law, and would thus violate the

rule of law contained in the said Article. Chandrachud,

J., was a little more explicit in that he expressly351referred toArticle 14and stated thatArticle 329-Ais an

outright negation of the right of equality conferred byArticle 14.This was the case because the law would

be discriminatory in that certain high personages would

be put above the law in the absence of a differentia

reasonably related to the object of the law. He went on

to add:

37.        This paragraph is an early application of the

doctrine of arbitrariness which follows from the rule of

law contained inArticle 14.It is of some significance

that Dicey’s formulation of the rule of law was referred

to, which contains both absence of arbitrary power and

equality before the law, as being of the essence of the

rule of law.

38.        We now come to the development of the

doctrine of arbitrariness and its application to State

action as a distinct doctrine on which State action may

be struck down as being violative of the rule of law

contained inArticle 14.In a significant passage

Bhagwati, J., inE.P. Royappa v. State of T.N., (1974)

4 SCC 3 stated (at page 38):

They require that State action must be
based on valid relevant principles
applicable alike to all similarly situate and it
must not be guided by any extraneous or
irrelevant considerations because that
would be denial of equality. Where the
operative reason for State action, as355distinguished from motive inducing from the
      antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate
      and relevant but is extraneous and outside
      the area of permissible considerations, it
      would amount to mala fide exercise of
      power and that is hit byArticles 14and16.Mala fide exercise of power and
      arbitrariness are different lethal radiations
      emanating from the same vice: in fact the
      latter comprehends the former. Both are
      inhibited byArticles 14and 16.”
                             [Emphasis Supplied]

39.       This was further fleshed out inManeka

Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248, where,

after stating that various fundamental rights must be

read together and must overlap and fertilize each other,

Bhagwati, J., further amplified this doctrine as follows

(at pages 283-284):

40.         This was further clarified inA.L. Kalra v.

Project and Equipment Corpn., (1984) 3 SCC 316,

followingRoyappa(supra)    and     holding      that

arbitrariness is a doctrine distinct from discrimination. It

was held:

InManeka Gandhi v. Union of India[(1978)
      1 SCC 248: AIR 1978 SC 597: (1978) 2
      SCR 621] it was observed thatArticle 14strikes at arbitrariness in State action and
      ensures fairness and equality of treatment.It is thus too late in the day to contend that
      an executive action shown to be arbitrary is
      not either judicially reviewable or within the
      reach         of        Article        14.”
                                         (at page 328)

The same view was reiterated inBabita Prasad v.

State of Bihar, (1993) Suppl. 3 SCC 268 at 285, at

paragraph 31.

41.        That the arbitrariness doctrine contained inArticle   14would   apply    to   negate        legislation,

subordinate legislation and executive action is clear

from a celebrated passage in the case ofAjay Hasia v.358Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) 1 SCC 722 (at pages

740-741):

Now, what is the content and
            reach of this great equalising
            principle? It is a founding faith,
            to use the words of Bose, J., “a359way of life”, and it must not be
     subjected to a narrow pedantic
     or lexicographic approach. We
     cannot       countenance       any
     attempt      to     truncate    its
     all-embracing        scope     and
     meaning, for to do so would be
     to violate its activist magnitude.

Equality is a dynamic concept
     with     many      aspects    and
     dimensions and it cannot be
     “cribbed, cabined and confined”
     within traditional and doctrinaire
     limits. From a positivistic point
     of view, equality is antithetic to
     arbitrariness. In fact, equality
     and arbitrariness are sworn
     enemies; one belongs to the
     rule of law in a republic while
     the other, to the whim and
     caprice of an absolute monarch.
     Where an act is arbitrary it is
     implicit in it that it is unequal
     both according to political logic
     and constitutional law and is
     therefore violative ofArticle 14,
     and if it affects any matter
     relating to public employment, it
     is also violative ofArticle 16.Articles 14and16strike at
     arbitrariness in State action and
     ensure fairness and equality of
     treatment.”

This vital and dynamic aspect which was till
then lying latent and submerged in the few
simple but pregnant words ofArticle 14was
explored and brought to light inRoyappacase [(1975) 1 SCC 485: 1975 SCC (L&S)
99: (1975) 3 SCR 616] and it was
reaffirmed and elaborated by this Court
inManeka Gandhi v. Union of India[(1978)
1 SCC 248] where this Court again
speaking through one of us (Bhagwati, J.)
observed: (SCC pp. 283-84, para 7)360“Now the question immediately
      arises as to what is the
      requirement ofArticle 14:What
      is the content and reach of the
      great       equalising      principle
      enunciated in this Article? There
      can be no doubt that it is a
      founding        faith     of      the
      Constitution. It is indeed the
      pillar on which rests securely
      the       foundation      of      our
      democratic        republic.     And,
      therefore, it must not be
      subjected to a narrow, pedantic
      or lexicographic approach. No
      attempt should be made to
      truncate its all-embracing scope
      and meaning, for to do so would
      be to violate its activist
      magnitude. Equality is a
      dynamic concept with many
      aspects and dimensions and it
      cannot be imprisoned within
      traditional      and     doctrinaire
      limits....Article 14strikes at
      arbitrariness in State action and
      ensures fairness and equality of
      treatment.The principle of
      reasonableness, which legally
      as well as philosophically, is an
      essential element of equality or
      non-arbitrariness         pervadesArticle 14like a brooding
      omnipresence.”

This was again reiterated by this Court
in International       Airport         Authority
case [(1979) 3 SCC 489] at p. 1042 (SCC
p. 511) of the Report. It must therefore now
be taken to be well settled that whatArticle
14strikes at is arbitrariness because an
action that is arbitrary, must necessarily
involve negation of equality. The doctrine of
classification which is evolved by the courts
is not paraphrase ofArticle 14nor is it the
objective and end of that article. It is merely361a judicial formula for determining whether
      the legislative or executive action in
      question is arbitrary and therefore
      constituting denial of equality. If the
      classification is not reasonable and does
      not satisfy the two conditions referred to
      above, the impugned legislative or
      executive action would plainly be arbitrary
      and the guarantee of equality underArticle
      14would be breached. Wherever therefore
      there is arbitrariness in State action
      whether it be of the legislature or of the
      executive or of an ‘authority’ underArticle
      12,Article 14immediately springs into
      action and strikes down such State action.
      In fact, the concept of reasonableness and
      non-arbitrariness pervades the entire
      constitutional scheme and is a golden
      thread which runs through the whole of the
      fabric of the Constitution.”

                           [Emphasis Supplied]

42.In this view of the law, a three Judge Bench

of this Court inK.R. Lakshmanan (Dr.) v. State of

T.N., (1996) 2 SCC 226, struck down a 1986 Tamil

Nadu Act on the ground that it was arbitrary and,

therefore, violative ofArticle 14.Two separate

arguments were addressed underArticle 14.One was

that the Act in question was discriminatory and,

therefore, violative ofArticle 14.The other was that in

any case the Act was arbitrary and for that reason

would also violate a separate facet ofArticle 14.This

is clear from paragraph 45 ofthe said judgment.     The

judgment went on to accept both these arguments. In362so far as the discrimination aspect is concerned, this

Court struck down the 1986 Act on the ground that it

was   discriminatory   in   paragraphs    46    and   47.

Paragraphs 48 to 50 are important, in that this Court

struck down the 1986 Act          for being arbitrary,

separately, as follows (at pages 256-257):

43.       Close upon the heels of this judgment, a

discordant note was struck inState of A.P. v.364McDowell & Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709. Another three

Judge Bench, in repelling an argument based on the

arbitrariness facet ofArticle 14, held:

44.        This judgment failed to notice at least two

binding precedents, first, the judgment of a Constitution

Bench inAjay Hasia(supra) and second, the judgment

of a coordinate three judge bench inLakshmanan(supra). Apart from this, the reasoning contained as to

why arbitrariness cannot be used to strike down

legislation as opposed to both executive action and

subordinate legislation was as follows:367

Supreme Court of India, (2014) 9 SCC 737, has held,

following the celebratedManeka Gandhi(supra), as

follows:

283-84, para 6)

     “6. … In Sunil Batra v. Delhi
     Admn. [(1978) 4 SCC 494:

Mathew, J., while delivering the first Tej Bahadur

Sapru Memorial Lecture entitled “Democracy and

Judicial Review”, has pointed out:

However, the three Judge Bench inMcdowell(supra) dealt with the binding Constitution Bench

     decision inMithu(supra) as follows (at page 739):

(2) The second reason given is that a challenge underArticle 14has to be viewed separately from a challenge

      underArticle 19, which is a reiteration of the point of

      view ofA.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, 1950 SCR

      88, that fundamental rights must be seen in watertight

      compartments.We have seen how this view was

      upset by an eleven Judge Bench of this Court inRustom Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India, (1970) 1

      SCC 248, and followed inManeka Gandhi(supra).

      Arbitrariness in legislation is very much a facet of

      unreasonableness inArticle 19(2)to (6), as has beenlaid down inseveral Judgments of this Court, some of

      which are referred to in Om Kumar (infra) and,

      therefore, there is no reason why arbitrariness cannot

      be used in the aforesaid sense to strike down

      legislation underArticle 14as well.


      (3) The third reason given is that the Courts cannot sit

      in Judgment over Parliamentary wisdom.            Our law

      reports are replete with instance after instance where

      Parliamentary wisdom has been successfully set at378naught by this Court because such laws did not pass

muster on account of their being “unreasonable”, which

is referred to in Om Kumar (infra).

We must never forget the admonition given by

Khanna, J. inState of Punjab v. Khan Chand, (1974)

1 SCC 549. He said:

2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580] the
majority upholding the legislation. The
dissenting judgment of Bhagwati, J.

(seeBachan           Singh v. State        of
Punjab[(1982) 3 SCC 24 : 1982 SCC (Cri)
535]) dealt elaborately with “proportionality”
and held that the punishment provided by
the statute was disproportionate.

32. So far asArticle 14is concerned, the
courts in India examined whether the
classification was based on intelligible
differentia and whether the differentia had a
reasonable nexus with the object of the
legislation. Obviously, when the courts
considered the question whether the
classification was based on intelligible
differentia, the courts were examining the
validity of the differences and the adequacy
of the differences. This is again nothing but
the principle of proportionality. There are
also cases where legislation or rules have
been struck down as being arbitrary in the
sense of being unreasonable [seeAir
India v. Nergesh Meerza[(1981) 4 SCC
335: 1981 SCC (L&S) 599] (SCC at pp.
372-373)].But this latter aspect of striking
down legislation only on the basis of
“arbitrariness” has been doubted inState of
A.P. v. McDowell and Co.[(1996) 3 SCC
709] .”382

45.        The thread of reasonableness runs through

the entire fundamental rights Chapter.            What is

manifestly arbitrary is obviously unreasonable and

being contrary to the rule of law, would violate Article

14. Further, there is an apparent contradiction in the

three Judges’ Bench decision inMcDowell(supra)

when it is said that a constitutional challenge can

succeed on the ground that a law is “disproportionate,

excessive or unreasonable”, yet such challenge would

fail on the very ground of the law being “unreasonable,

unnecessary or unwarranted”.           The arbitrariness

doctrine when applied to legislation obviously would

not involve the latter challenge but would only involve a

law being disproportionate, excessive or otherwise

being manifestly unreasonable.         All the aforesaid

grounds, therefore, do not seek to differentiate

between State action in its various forms, all of which

are interdicted if they fall foul of the fundamental rights

guaranteed to persons and citizens in Part III of the

Constitution.

46.        We only need to point out that even afterMcDowell(supra), this Court has in fact negated

statutory law on the ground of it being arbitrary and383therefore violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution of

India.InMalpe Vishwanath Acharya v. State of

Maharashtra, (1998) 2 SCC 1, this Court held that

after passage of time, a law can become arbitrary, and,

therefore, the freezing of rents at a 1940 market value

under the Bombay Rent Act would be arbitrary and

violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution of India (see

paragraphs 8 to 15 and 31).

47.          Similarly inMardia Chemicals Ltd. & Ors.

v. Union of India & Ors.etc. etc., (2004) 4 SCC 311

at 354, this Court struck downSection 17(2)of the

Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets

and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, as

follows:

48.In two other fairly recent judgments namelyState of Tamil Nadu v. K. Shyam Sunder, (2011) 8

SCC 737 at paragraphs 50 to 53, andA.P. Dairy

Development Corpn. Federation v. B. Narasimha

Reddy, (2011) 9 SCC 286 at paragraph 29, this Court

reiterated the position of law that a legislation can be

struck down on the ground that it is arbitrary and

therefore violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution.

49.In a Constitution Bench decision inAshoka Kumar

Thakur v. Union of India, (2008) 6 SCC 1 at 524, an

extravagant argument that the impugned legislation

was intended to please a section of the community as

part of the vote catching mechanism was held to not be

a legally acceptable plea and rejected by holding that:

50.   A   subsequent    Constitution   Bench     inK.T.

Plantation (P) Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (2011) 9

SCC 1, dealt with the constitutional validity of theRoerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition

and Transfer) Act, 1996, the legal validity ofSection

110of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961,

Notification No. RD 217 LRA 93 dated 8-3-1994 issued

by the State Government thereunder and the scope

and content ofArticle 300-Aof the Constitution.While386examining the validity of a legislation which deprives a

person of property underArticle 300-A, this Court when

faced withMcdowell(supra) pointed out that (at page

58):

Instead, it broad based the test, stating that if a

constitutional infirmity is found,Article 14will interdict

such infirmity. And a constitutional infirmity is found inArticle 14itself whenever legislation is “manifestly

arbitrary”; i.e. when     it is not fair, not reasonable,

discriminatory, not transparent, capricious, biased, with

favoritism or nepotism and not in pursuit of promotion

of   healthy     competition   and   equitable     treatment.

Positively speaking, it should conform to norms which

are rational, informed with reason and guided by public

interest, etc.

52. Another Constitution Bench decision reported asDr. Subramanian Swamy v. Director, Central Bureau

of Investigation, (2014) 8 SCC 682, dealt with a

challenge toSection 6-Aof the Delhi Special Police

Establishment Act, 1946. This Section was ultimately

struck down as being discriminatory and hence

violative ofArticle 14.A specific reference had been

made to the Constitution Bench by the reference order

inDr. Subramanian Swamy v. Director, Central391Bureau of Investigation, (2005) 2 SCC 317, and after

referring to several judgments includingAjay Hasia(supra),Mardia     Chemicals(supra),Malpe

Vishwanath Acharya(supra) andMcDowell(supra),

the reference inter alia was as to whether arbitrariness

and unreasonableness, being facets ofArticle 14, are

or are not available as grounds to invalidate a

legislation.

After referring to the submissions of counsel, and

several judgments on the discrimination aspect ofArticle 14, this Court held:

“48.InE.P.                 Royappa [E.P.
      Royappa v. State of T.N., (1974) 4 SCC 3:

Where the legislation is sought to be
challenged as being unconstitutional and
violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution,
the Court must remind itself to the
principles relating to the applicability ofArticle 14in relation to invalidation of
legislation. The two dimensions ofArticle 14in its application to legislation and
rendering legislation invalid are now well
recognised       and      these      are:     (i)
discrimination, based on an impermissible
or invalid classification, and (ii) excessive
delegation of powers; conferment of
uncanalised and unguided powers on the
executive, whether in the form of delegated
legislation or by way of conferment of
authority to pass administrative orders—if
such conferment is without any guidance,
control or checks, it is violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution. The Court also needs to
be mindful that a legislation does not
become unconstitutional merely because
there is another view or because another
method may be considered to be as good393or even more effective, like any issue of
      social, or even economic policy. It is well
      settled that the courts do not substitute
      their views on what the policy is.”

                                (at pages 721-722)


  Since the Court ultimately struck down Section 6-A

on the ground that it was discriminatory, it became

unnecessary to pronounce on one of the questions

referred to it, namely, as to whether arbitrariness could

be a ground for invalidating legislation underArticle 14.Indeed the Court said as much in paragraph 98 of the

judgment as under (at page 740):

53.       However, inState of Bihar v. Bihar

Distillery Ltd., (1997) 2 SCC 453 at paragraph 22, inState of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli, (2012) 6 SCC 312 at

paragraphs 17 to 19, inRajbala v. State of Haryana &

Ors., (2016) 2 SCC 445 at paragraphs 53 to 65 and

Binoy Viswam v. Union of India, (2017) 7 SCC 59 at

paragraphs 80 to 82,McDowell(supra) was read as

being an absolute bar to the use of “arbitrariness” as a394tool to strike down legislation underArticle 14.As has

been noted by us earlier in this judgment,Mcdowell(supra) itself is per incuriam, not having noticed several

judgments of Benches of equal or higher strength, its

reasoning     even    otherwise    being     flawed.The

judgments, followingMcDowell(supra) are, therefore,

no longer good law.

54.         To complete the picture, it is important to

note that subordinate legislation can be struck down on

the ground that it is arbitrary and, therefore, violative ofArticle 14of the Constitution.InCellular Operators

Association     of    India   v.   Telecom     Regulatory

Authority of India, (2016) 7 SCC 703, this Court

referred to earlier precedents, and held:

(SeeIndian       Express      Newspapers
      (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India[(1985)
      1 SCC 641: 1985 SCC (Tax) 121], SCC at
      p. 689, para 75.)

43. The test of “manifest arbitrariness” is
      well explained in two judgments of this
      Court.InKhoday Distilleries Ltd. v. State of395Karnataka[(1996) 10 SCC 304], this Court
held: (SCC p. 314, para 13)

     “13. It is next submitted before
     us that the amended Rules are
     arbitrary, unreasonable and
     cause undue hardship and,
     therefore, violateArticle 14of
     the Constitution. Although the
     protection ofArticle 19(1)(g)may not be available to the
     appellants, the Rules must,
     undoubtedly, satisfy the test ofArticle 14, which is a guarantee
     against        arbitrary      action.

However, one must bear in
     mind that what is being
     challenged here underArticle
     14is not executive action but
     delegated legislation. The tests
     of arbitrary action which apply
     to executive actions do not
     necessarily apply to delegated
     legislation.     In     order    that
     delegated legislation can be
     struck down, such legislation
     must be manifestly arbitrary; a
     law which could not be
     reasonably         expected        to
     emanate from an authority
     delegated with the law-making
     power.InIndian       Express
     Newspapers (Bombay) (P)
     Ltd. v. Union of India[(1985) 1
     SCC 641 : 1985 SCC (Tax)
     121], this Court said that a
     piece of subordinate legislation
     does not carry the same degree
     of immunity which is enjoyed by
     a statute passed by a
     competent              legislature. A
     subordinate legislation may be
     questioned underArticle 14on
     the     ground       that     it    is
     unreasonable;        ‘unreasonable
     not in the sense of not being396reasonable, but in the sense
     that it is manifestly arbitrary’.
     Drawing a comparison between
     the law in England and in India,
     the Court further observed that
     in England the Judges would
     say, ‘Parliament never intended
     the authority to make such
     Rules; they are unreasonable
     and ultra vires’. In India,
     arbitrariness is not a separate
     ground since it will come within
     the embargo ofArticle 14of the
     Constitution. But subordinate
     legislation must be so arbitrary
     that it could not be said to be in
     conformity with the statute or
     that it offendsArticle 14of the
     Constitution.”

44. Also, inSharma Transport v. State of
A.P.[(2002) 2 SCC 188], this Court held:

The test of manifest arbitrariness, therefore, aslaid

down inthe aforesaid judgments would apply to

invalidate legislation as well as subordinate legislation

underArticle 14.Manifest arbitrariness, therefore,

must be something done by the legislature capriciously,

irrationally     and/or   without    adequate    determining

principle.      Also, when something is done which is

excessive and disproportionate, such legislation would

be manifestly arbitrary. We are, therefore, of the view

that arbitrariness in the sense of manifest arbitrariness

as pointed out by us above would apply to negate

legislation as well underArticle 14.

56.            Applying the test of manifest arbitrariness to

the case at hand, it is clear that Triple Talaq is a form of398Talaq which is itself considered to be something

innovative, namely, that it is not in the Sunna, being an

irregular or heretical form of Talaq. We have noticed

how in Fyzee’s book (supra), the Hanafi school of

Shariat law, which itself recognizes this form of Talaq,

specifically states that though lawful it is sinful in that it

incurs the wrath of God.Indeed, inShamim Ara v.

State of U.P., (2002) 7 SCC 518, this Court after

referring to a number of authorities including certain

recent High Court judgments held as under:

57.       Given the fact that Triple Talaq is instant and

irrevocable,   it   is   obvious   that   any    attempt    at

reconciliation between the husband and wife by two

arbiters from their families, which is essential to save

the marital tie, cannot ever take place.              Also, as

understood by the Privy Council inRashid Ahmad(supra), such Triple Talaq is valid even if it is not for

any reasonable cause, which view of the law no longer

holds good afterShamim Ara(supra). This being the

case, it is clear that this form of Talaq is manifestly

arbitrary in the sense that the marital tie can be broken

capriciously and whimsically by a Muslim man without

any attempt at reconciliation so as to save it. This form

of Talaq must, therefore, be held to be violative of the

fundamental right contained underArticle 14of the

Constitution of India.     In our opinion, therefore, the

1937 Act, insofar as it seeks to recognize and enforce

Triple Talaq, is within the meaning of the expression

“laws in force” inArticle 13(1)and must be struck down

as being void to the extent that it recognizes and

enforces Triple Talaq. Since we have declaredSection

2of the 1937 Act to be void to the extent indicated400above on the narrower ground of it being manifestly

arbitrary, we do not find the need to go into the ground

of discrimination in these cases, as was argued by the

learned Attorney General and those supporting him.

…………………………………J.
                       (Rohinton Fali Nariman)




                   …………………………………J.
                       (Uday Umesh Lalit)

New Delhi;

August 22, 2017.

401IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        Original Civil Jurisdiction


                     Writ Petition (C) No. 118 of 2016
Shayara Bano                                             …Petitioner
                                  versus
Union of India and others… Respondents

                                   withSuo Motu Writ (C) No. 2 of 2015In Re: Muslim Women’sQuest For Equality

                                  versus
Jamiat Ulma-I-Hind

                     Writ Petition(C) No.288 of 2016
Aafreen Rehman                                           …Petitioner
                                  versus
Union of India and others… Respondents


                     Writ Petition(C) No. 327 of 2016
Gulshan Parveen                                          …Petitioner
                                  versus
Union of India and others… Respondents


                     Writ Petition(C) No. 665 of 2016
Ishrat Jahan                                             …Petitioner
                                  versus
Union of India and others… Respondents


                      Writ Petition(C) No. 43 of 2017
Atiya Sabri                                              …Petitioner
                                  versus
Union of India and others… Respondents402ORDER OF THE COURT


        In view of the different opinions recorded, by a majority

of 3:2 the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq is set aside.

..………………..…..………CJI.

(Jagdish Singh Khehar)



                                              ..………………..…..…….……J.
                                              (Kurian Joseph)



                                              ..………………..…..…….……J.
                                              (Rohinton Fali Nariman)


                                              ..………………..…..…….……J.
                                              (Uday Umesh Lalit)



                                              ..………………..…..…….……J.
                                              (S. Abdul Nazeer)
   New Delhi;

August 22, 2017.

403