--- Judgment Metadata ---
Title: Smt.Safiya Sultana Thru. Husband ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Home, Lko. & ... on 12 January, 2021
Document ID: 148358566
Source URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/148358566/
Court: Allahabad High Court
Bench: Bench:Vivek Chaudhary
Date of Judgment: 12 January, 2021
Petitioner(s): Smt.Safiya Sultana Thru. Husband ...
Respondent(s): State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Home, Lko. & ...
Citations: Equivalent citations: AIR 2021 ALLAHABAD 56, AIRONLINE 2021 ALL 22

--- Judgment Content ---

Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Member Services--Sign up todayand get free trial for one month.

1.	The present Habeas Corpus Petition is filed by Petitioner no.1-wife through Petitioner no.2-husband, claiming that detenue-Petitioner no.1, Smt. Safia Sultana, who after converting to Hindu religion and renamed as Smt. Simran, married Petitioner no.2 as per Hindu rituals. However respondent No.4, her father, is not permitting her to live with her husband. They both are adults, duly married with their free will and desire to live together. Thus the custody of the detenue by her father is illegal. The Court directed for the presence of the detenue and her father. They both appeared in person, wherein, the Petitioner no.1 accepted the averments aforesaid and had shown her desire to live with her husband. The Respondent no.4-father of the detenue also fairly accepted that since she is an adult, has married with her choice and wanted to live with her husband, he also accepts her decision and wished both of them best for their future.

2.	This matter could have come to an end at this stage, but, for the views expressed by the young couple while interacting with the Court on their personal appearance, the young couple expressed that they could have solemnized their marriage under theSpecial Marriage Act, 1954but the said Act requires a 30 days notice to be published and objections to be invited from the public at large. They expressed that any such notice would be an invasion in their privacy and would have definitely caused unnecessary social pressure/interference in their free choice with regard to their marriage. The personal laws do not impose any such condition of publication of notice, inviting and deciding objections before solemnizing any marriage. They further state that such a challenge is being faced by a large number of similarly situated persons who desire to build a life with a partner of their own choice. Learned counsel for petitioners also stated that the situation may become more critical with notification of Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Unlawful Conversion of Religion Ordinance, 2020, as the same prohibits conversion of religion by marriage to be unlawful. Learned counsel for petitioners further argues that looking into the changing pattern of the society, amendments made to theSpecial Marriage Act, 1954as well as the law declared by the Supreme Court in the last around a decade with regard to privacy, liberty and freedom of choice of a person, provisions ofSpecial Marriage Act, 1954, directing publication of a notice before marriage and inviting public objections, require a revisit to understand whether now with the said change they are to be treated as mandatory or directory in nature.

3.	It is further submitted that such young couples are not in a position to raise these issues before solemnizing their marriages as any litigation further attracts unnecessary attention which invades into their privacy and also causes unnecessary social pressure upon them with regard to their choice of a life partner.

4.	Since, the issues raised by the petitioners and their counsels involves right of life and liberty of a large number of persons, therefore, this Court is duty bound to consider their submissions. Suffice would be to refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court inShakti Vahini vs. Union of Indiaand others1. The relevant paragraph reads:

5.	As the issue involves interpretation of a Central Act, Sri Surya Bhan Pandey, learned Assistant Solicitor General of India was also requested to assist the Court. Heard Sri Adarsh Kumar Maurya, Smt. Archana Singh, learned counsels for petitioners, Sri S.B. Pandey, learned Assistant Solicitor General assisted by Sri Amresh Rai and Sri Santosh Kumar Mishra, learned AGA-I for the State.

6.	For the purpose of the present case, following sections ofSpecial Marriage Act, 1954are of relevance:

5. Notice of intended marriage: When a marriage is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the parties to the marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the Second Schedule to the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the marriage has resided for a period of not less than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given.

6.Marriage Notice Book and publication: (1) The Marriage Officer shall keep all notices given undersection 5with the records of his office and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of every such notice in a book prescribed for that purpose, to be called the Marriage Notice Book, and such book shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times, without fee, by any person desirous of inspecting the same.

(2) The Marriage Officer shall cause every such notice to be published by affixing a copy thereof to some conspicuous place in his office.

(3) Where either of the parties to an intended marriage is not permanently residing within the local limits of the district of the Marriage Officer to whom the notice has been given undersection 5, the Marriage Officer shall also cause a copy of such notice to be transmitted to the Marriage Officer of the district within whose limits such party is permanently residing, and that Marriage Officer shall thereupon cause a copy thereof to be affixed to some conspicuous place in his office.

7. Objection to marriage: (1) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the date on which any such notice has been published under sub-section (2) ofsection 6, object to the marriage on the ground that it would contravene one or more of the conditions specified insection 4.

(2) After the expiration of thirty days from the date on which notice of an intended marriage has been published under sub-section (2) ofsection 6, the marriage may be solemnized, unless it has been previously objected to under sub-section (1).

(3) The nature of the objection shall be recorded in writing by the Marriage Officer in the Marriage Notice Book, be read over and explained if necessary, to the person making the objection and shall be signed by him or on his behalf.

8. Procedure on receipt of objection: (1) If an objection is made undersection 7to an intended marriage, the Marriage Officer shall not solemnize the marriage until he has inquired into the matter of the objection and is satisfied that it ought not to prevent the solemnization of the marriage or the objection is withdrawn by the person making it; but the Marriage Officer shall not take more than thirty days from the date of the objection for the purpose of inquiring into the matter of the objection and arriving at a decision.

(2) If the Marriage Officer upholds the objection and refuses to solemnize the marriage, either party to the intended marriage may, within a period of thirty days from the date of such refusal, prefer an appeal to the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has his office, and the decision of the district court on such appeal shall be final, and the Marriage Officer shall act in conformity with the decision of the court.

46. Penalty for wrongful action of Marriage Officer: Any Marriage Officer who knowingly and wilfully solemnizes a marriage under this Act,―
 
(1) without publishing a notice regarding such marriage as required bySection 5, or
 
(2) within thirty days of the publication of the notice of such marriage, or
 
(3) in contravention of any other provision in this Act, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both."

7.	The society has an ever changing phenomenon. It keeps changing with time as per its new needs, expectation and other changing aspects. The very purpose of law is to serve the society as per its requirements; therefore, the law also keeps evolving with the changes in society. Thus, it would be appropriate, before coming to theSpecial Marriage Act, 1954and its present relevance, to briefly visit the history and development of the law with regard to civil marriages in India.

8.	A Bill was introduced by Sir Henry Maine for the first time proposing a law for inter-cast and inter-religion marriages in India. The proposed Bill permitted any two citizens of India to marry under the same instead of their respective personal laws. The Bill was vehemently opposed in the legislature and was vastly modified before it was enacted and enforced on 22nd March 1872 as "Special Marriage Act, 1872 (Act of 1872)". The law, as passed, provided that any two persons after declaring complete severance from their respective faith can marry under the Act of 1872.The Actof 1872 was amended in the year 1923 and thereafter it became permissible for the individuals to marry under the same without renouncing their religion.2Section 2of the Act of 1872 provided the conditions to be fulfilled before any marriage could be performed.Section 6of the said Act provided procedure for a public notice to be made and thereafterSections 7and8and further sections provided the procedure for deciding the objections, if any, filed against the proposed marriage which could be filed by any person.

9.	With the independence of India and coming into force of a secular Constitution in January, 1950, the Parliament proceeded to revisit the personal laws and laws with regard to marriages and thus along with other enactments, it also passed theSpecial Marriage Act, 1954(Act of 1954).Under the Actof 1954 any two Indians living wheresoever, and whether professing the same or different religions (or no religion at all), could solemnize their marriage provided that they fulfilled the conditions provided underSection 4of the said Act. Act of 1954 also provided that an existing marriage, solemnized under whatever law, could be registered under the new law, if the same fulfilled the conditions provided therein. After registration, the marriage stood covered under the provisions of Act of 1954 and not under the personal law wherein it was initially solemnized.The Actof 1954 also prescribed rights of persons concerned with regard to separation, divorce and inheritance etc. including judicial procedures for enforcement of the same and thus came in force a complete code with regard to civil marriages in India.The Actof 1954 was also amended from time to time as per the changing needs of the society. The procedure of publishing a notice and inviting objections from public at large, as was provided under Act of 1872 was, thus, also adopted by the Act of 1954 with minor variations.

10.	The golden rule of interpretation of statute is that so far as possible plain reading of the provisions should be accepted. Further, if any penal consequences are provided the provision would be mandatory in nature. In view of aforesaid, more specifically in view of the punitive consequences underSection 46, the publication of notice underSection 6and inviting objections and decision thereupon underSection 7was treated as mandatory. Thus the Marriage Officers have always published a notice of intended marriage and invited objections. Marriages under the Act of 1954 were only solemnized after a period of thirty days of notice or after decision on the objections, in case filed.

11.	The question raised before this Court is, whether the social conditions and the law, as has progressed since passing of Act of 1872 and thereafter Act of 1954 till now, would in any manner impact the interpretation ofSections 5,6and7of the Act of 1954 and whether with change the said sections no more remain mandatory in nature. This argument is based on another principle of interpretation, that, an ongoing statute should be interpreted on the basis of present day's changed conditions and not on old obsolete conditions. The Supreme Court considered the said principle inSatyawati Sharma vs. Union of India3. The Supreme Court, referring to its earlier judgments, held:

33.InNarottam Kishore Dev Verma vs. Union of India[AIR 1964 SC 1590] the challenge was to the validity ofSection 87-Bof the Code of Civil Procedure which granted exemption to the rulers of former Indian States from being sued except with the consent of the Central Government. In the course of judgment, it was observed as under: (AIR p.1593, para 11)
 
"11. ..If under the Constitution all citizens are equal, it may be desirable to confine the operation of Section 87-B to past transactions and nor to perpetuate the anomaly of the distinction between the rest of the citizens and Rulers of former Indian States. With the passage of time, the validity of historical considerations on which Section 87-B is founded will wear out and the continuance of the said section inthe Code of Civil Proceduremay later be open to serious challenge."

34.InH.H. Shri Swamiji Shri Admar Mutt Etc, vs. The Commissioner, Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments Department[1979 (4) SCC 642] this Court was called upon to consider the validity of the continued application of the provisions of theMadras Hindu Religious Endowment Act, 1951in the area which had formerly been part of State of Madras and which had latter become part of the new State of Mysore (now Karnataka) as a result of the State Re-organisation Act, 1956. While declining to strike down the legislation on the ground of violation ofArticle 14of the Constitution, the Court observed: (SCC p.658, para 29)
 
"An indefinite extension and application of unequal laws for all time to come will militate against their true character as temporary measures taken in order to serve a temporary purpose. Thereby, the very foundation of their constitutionality shall have been destroyed the foundation being thatSection 119of the State Reorganisation Act serves the significant purpose of giving reasonable time to the new units to consider the special circumstances obtaining in respect of diverse units. The decision to withdraw the application of unequal laws to equals cannot be delayed unreasonably because of the relevance of historical reasons which justify the application of unequal laws is bound to wear out with the passage of time. In Broom's Legal; Maxim (1939 Edition, page 97) can be found a useful principle "Cessante Ratione Legis Cessat Ipsa Lex", that is to say, "Reason is the soul of the law, and when the reason of any particular law ceases, so does the law itself."

32.InMotor General Traders vs. State of Andhra Pradesh(supra), validity ofSection 32(b)of the A.P. Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control, Act, 1960 was considered. By that Section it was declared that the provisions of the main Act will not apply to the buildings constructed after 25th August, 1957.The Court noted that exemption had continued for nearly a quarter century and struck down the same despite the fact that validity thereon had been upheld by the High Court inChintapalli Achaiah vs. P. Gopala Krishna Reddy[ AIR 1966 AP 51]. Some of the observations made in the judgment are worth noticing. These are:

12.	Following Satyawati Sharma3 in case ofKashmir Singh vs. Union of India4the Supreme Court holds:

13.	Thus this Court is required to consider the changes in the social and legal aspects, if any, that may impact the interpretation of the provisions of the Act of 1954.

Reports of the Law Commission of India:

14.	Touching upon the Act of 1954, the changes occurring in the society over a period of time and need for consequential changes to be brought in law is aptly emphasised and followed by the Law Commission of India (Law Commission) in its following reports.

15.	In its 59th report submitted in the year 1974, the Law Commission, while proposing amendments in the Act of 1954 as well as in theHindu Marriage Act, 1955, states:

16.	Concluding the said report, the Law Commission proposed Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill of 1974 suggesting amendments in the Act of 1954 as well as in theHindu Marriage Act, 1955.The Actof 1954 was duly amended in the year 1976.

17.	The Law Commission again submitted a report No.212, in the year 2008, titled "Laws of Civil Marriages in India - A Proposal to Resolve Certain Conflicts". After taking into consideration the changes in the social norms as well as in law, the Law Commission made seven recommendations with regard to Act of 1954. Relevant for our purposes are:

2. A provision be added to the application clause in theSpecial Marriage Act1954 that all inter-religious marriages except those within the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh and Jain communities, whether solemnized or registered under this Act or not shall be governed by this Act.

3. The definition of "degrees of prohibited relationship" given inSection 2 (b)in theSpecial Marriage Act1954 and the First Schedule detailing such degrees appended to the Act be omitted. Instead, it should be provided inSection 4of the Act that prohibited degrees in marriage in any case of an intended civil marriage shall be regulated by the marriage law (or laws) otherwise applicable to the parties.

4. The requirement of a gazette notification for recognition of custom relating to prohibited degrees in marriage found in the Explanation toSection 4of the Special Marriage Act 1954 be deleted."

18.	Again the Law Commission submitted report No.242, in the year 2012, titled "Prevention of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances (in the name of Honour and Tradition): A Suggested Legal Framework." It states:

19.	It recommended to simplify the procedure under theSpecial Marriage Act. It says:

20.	It summarily recommended:

21.	It appears that the Bills proposed by the Law Commission in its reports No. 212 (year 2008) and 242 (year 2012) are still pending for consideration.

Development of Law:

22.Lata Singh Vs. State of U.P.and another5 was one of the initial cases which came up before the Supreme Court raising the issue of the right of a person to marry of his own choice. In the said case petitioner solemnized her marriage, with her own free will, with a person of another caste. The said marriage was strongly opposed by her brothers and they also committed violence upon her and her husband. Condemning the same, Supreme Court held:

23.	Again the issue was considered in the cases of Arumugam Servai vs. State of Tamil Nadu6and Bhagwan Dass vs. State (NCT of Delhi)7. In both the cases, brutality was caused by "khappanchayat" or family members against the persons solemnizing marriage with their own choice. The Supreme Court referring to the case of Lata Singh5strongly condemned and criticized such atrocious acts and directed the State authorities to take immediate steps in all such cases.

24.	In Indian Woman Says Gang-Raped on Orders of Village Court Published in Business and Financial News Dated 23-1-2014 in Re8 the Supreme Court found the right of freedom of choice in marriage to be a fundamental right and an inherent aspect ofArticle 21of the Constitution of India. The court declared:

25.	Another case of honour killing came up before Supreme Court inVikas Yadav vs. State of U.P.and another9. Again Court held:

26.InAsha Ranjan vs. State of Bihar10, the Supreme Court again declared the right of a person in choosing a partner to be legitimate constitutional right recognized underArticle 19of the Constitution of India. The judgment reads:

27.	Supreme Court considered the matter of the honour killing and right to marry at length in the case of Shakti Vahini1. The relevant paragraphs ofthe said judgmentread as under:

28.	Thus the Supreme Court in the case of Shakti Vahini1 again held the right to choose a life partner, to be a fundamental right recognized underArticle 19and21of the Constitution. Once the said fundamental right is inherent in a person, the same cannot be scuttled. It found that it is the duty of the Court to remove any interference with the legitimate rights of the young couples or anyone associated with them. The Supreme Court also issued preventive, remedial as well as punitive measures to be followed and implemented by the State authorities.

29.	In a Habeas Corpus Petition Shafin Jahan vs. Asokan K.M. and Others11 again right of an individual to marry without any interference came up before the Supreme Court. In the said case, the High Court failed to take appropriate steps for releasing the detenue, a major lady, to live with her own choice, while trying to make out a case of attempts being made for taking her out of the country after change of religion in a clandestine manner. The relevant portions of the judgment read:

A Constitution Bench of this Court, inCommon Cause (A Regd. Society) vs. Union of Indiareported in (2018) 5 SCC 1, held: (SCC p.194, para 346)
 
"346. ...Our autonomy as persons is founded on the ability to decide:

88.InRam Jethmalani vs. Union of Indiareported in (2011) 8 SCC 1: (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 310 ("Ram Jethmalani"), a Bench of two Judges was dealing with a public interest litigation concerned with unaccounted monies and seeking the appointment of a Special Investigating Team to follow and investigate a money trail. This Court held that the revelation of the details of the bank accounts of individuals without the establishment of a prima facie ground of wrongdoing would be a violation of the right to privacy. This Court observed thus: (SCC pp.35-36, paras 83 & 84)
 
"83. Right to privacy is an integral part of right to life. This is a cherished constitutional value, and it is important that human beings be allowed domains of freedom that are free of public scrutiny unless they act in an unlawful manner. We understand and appreciate the fact that the situation with respect to unaccounted for monies is extremely grave. Nevertheless, as constitutional adjudicators we always have to be mindful of preserving the sanctity of constitutional values, and hasty steps that derogate from fundamental rights, whether urged by Governments or private citizens, howsoever well-meaning they may be, have to be necessarily very carefully scrutinised. The solution for the problem of abrogation of one zone of constitutional values cannot be the creation of another zone of abrogation of constitutional values.

84. The rights of citizens, to effectively seek the protection of fundamental rights, under clause (1) ofArticle 32have to be balanced against the rights of citizens and persons under Article 21.The latter cannot be sacrificed on the anvil of fervid desire to find instantaneous solutions to systemic problems such as unaccounted for monies, for it would lead to dangerous circumstances, in which vigilante investigations, inquisitions and rabble rousing, by masses of other citizens could become the order of the day. The right of citizens to petition this Court for upholding of fundamental rights is granted in order that citizens, inter alia, are ever vigilant about the functioning of the State in order to protect the constitutional project. That right cannot be extended to being inquisitors of fellow citizens. An inquisitorial order, where citizens' fundamental right to privacy is breached by fellow citizens is destructive of social order. The notion of fundamental rights, such as a right to privacy as part of right to life, is not merely that the State is enjoined from derogating from them. It also includes the responsibility of the State to uphold them against the actions of others in the society, even in the context of exercise of fundamental rights by those others."                   (emphasis supplied)

33.	The Supreme Court further stated:

34.	Concurring with the same, Justice Chelameswar in his separate judgment, in paragraph 375 states:

35.	Again agreeing, Chief Justice S. A. Bobde (then Justice S.A. Bobde) states in paragraphs 402, 403 and 407:

407. Undoubtedly, privacy exists, as the foregoing demonstrates, as a verifiable fact in all civilized societies. But privacy does not stop at being merely a descriptive claim. It also embodies a normative one. The normative case for privacy is intuitively simple. Nature has clothed man, amongst other things, with dignity and liberty so that he may be free to do what he will consistent with the freedom of another and to develop his faculties to the fullest measure necessary to live in happiness and peace. The Constitution, through its Part III, enumerates many of these freedoms and their corresponding rights as fundamental rights. Privacy is an essential condition for the exercise of most of these freedoms. Ex facie, every right which is integral to the constitutional rights to dignity, life, personal liberty and freedom, as indeed the right to privacy is, must itself be regarded as a fundamental right."           (emphasis supplied)

36.	Justice R. F. Nariman also concurring in his separate judgment states:

37.	Thus, the nine-Judges Bench concluded:

38.	Again the issue with regard to the personal rights of an individual came up before a Constitution Bench of Supreme Court in the case ofNavtej Singh Johar and others vs. Union of India13. The vires ofSection 377I.P.C. came under consideration in the said case. The Court held:

110. The Supreme Court as well as other constitutional courts have time and again realized that in a society undergoing fast social and economic change, static judicial interpretation of the Constitution would stultify the spirit of the Constitution. Accordingly, the constitutional courts, while viewing the Constitution as a transformative document, have ardently fulfilled their obligation to act as the sentinel on qui vive for guarding the rights of all individuals irrespective of their sex, choice and sexual orientation.

121. An argument is sometimes advanced that what is permissible between two adults engaged in acceptable sexual activity is different in the case of two individuals of the same sex, be it homosexuals or lesbians, and the ground of difference is supported by social standardization. Such an argument ignores the individual orientation, which is naturally natural, and disrobes the individual of his/her identity and the inherent dignity and choice attached to his/her being.

122. The principle of transformative constitutionalism also places upon the judicial arm of the State a duty to ensure and uphold the supremacy of the Constitution, while at the same time ensuring that a sense of transformation is ushered constantly and endlessly in the society by interpreting and enforcing the Constitution as well as other provisions of law in consonance with the avowed object. The idea is to steer the country and its institutions in a democratic egalitarian direction where there is increased protection of fundamental rights and other freedoms. It is in this way that transformative constitutionalism attains the status of an ideal model imbibing the philosophy and morals of constitutionalism and fostering greater respect for human rights. It ought to be remembered that the Constitution is not a mere parchment; it derives its strength from the ideals and values enshrined in it. However, it is only when we adhere to constitutionalism as the supreme creed and faith and develop a constitutional culture to protect the fundamental rights of an individual that we can preserve and strengthen the values of our compassionate Constitution.

131. The duty of the constitutional courts is to adjudge the validity of law on well-established principles, namely, legislative competence or violations of fundamental rights or of any other constitutional provisions. At the same time, it is expected from the courts as the final arbiter of the Constitution to uphold the cherished principles of the Constitution and not to be remotely guided by majoritarian view or popular perception. The Court has to be guided by the conception of constitutional morality and not by the societal morality.

167. The above authorities capture the essence of the right to privacy. There can be no doubt that an individual also has a right to a union underArticle 21of the Constitution. When we say union, we do not mean the union of marriage, though marriage is a union. As a concept, union also means companionship in every sense of the word, be it physical, mental, sexual or emotional. The LGBT community is seeking realisation of its basic right to companionship, so long as such a companionship is consensual, free from the vice of deceit, force, coercion and does not result in violation of the fundamental rights of others.

613. The choice of a partner, the desire for personal intimacy and the yearning to find love and fulfilment in human relationships have a universal appeal, straddling age and time. In protecting consensual intimacies, the Constitution adopts a simple principle: the State has no business to intrude into these personal matters. Nor can societal notions of heteronormativity regulate constitutional liberties based on sexual orientation."                             (emphasis supplied)

39.	One of the issues before the court was the considerations to be taken into account by a court when a fundamental right is violated by a law. The Supreme Court held:

40.	The law as declared by the Supreme Court, since the case of Lata Singh5 till the decision in Navtej Singh Johar13, has travelled a long distance defining fundamental rights of personal liberty and of privacy. "once a person becomes a major he or she can marry whosoever he/she likes" (Lata Singh5); "an inherent aspect ofArticle 21of the Constitution would be the freedom of choice in marriage"(Indian Woman Says Gang-Raped on Orders of Village Court8); "choice of woman in choosing her partner in life is a legitimate constitutional right. It is founded on individual choice that is recognized in the Constitution underArticle 19" (Asha Ranjan10); "the consent of the family or the community or the clan is not necessary once the two adult individuals agree to enter into a wedlock.....it is a manifestation of their choice which is recognized underArticles 19and21of the Constitution"(Shakti Vahini1); "Neither the state nor the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide on these matters..... Social approval for intimate personal decisions is not the basis for recognising them."(Shafin Jahan11) and finally the nine-judges bench "Privacy is the ultimate expression of the sanctity of the individual. It is a constitutional value which straddles across the spectrum of fundamental rights and protects for the individual a zone of choice and self-determination.......privacy is one of the most important rights to be protected both against State and non-State actors and be recognized as a fundamental right."(Puttuswamy12) is a long chain of decisions growing stronger with time and firmly establishing personal liberty and privacy to be fundamental rights including within their sphere right to choose partner without interference from State, family or society.

41.	In view of the changed social circumstances and progress in laws noted and proposed by the Law Commission as well as law declared by the aforesaid judgments of the Supreme Court, it would be cruel and unethical to force the present generation living with its current needs and expectations to follow the customs and traditions adopted by a generation living nearly 150 years back for its social needs and circumstances, which violates fundamental rights recognized by the courts of the day. In view of law settled in Satyawati Sharma3 and Kashmir Singh4as stated above, it is the duty of this court to revisit the interpretation of the procedure under challenge as provided in the Act of 1954.

42.	In Githa Hariharan vs. Reserve Bank of India14,Supreme Court restates the principle of interpretation of statute, that, where two constructions of the statute are possible court will uphold the one that is in consonance with the Constitution of India rather one that would go against it.

43.InN. Kannadasan vs. Ajoy Khose15again Supreme Court in held:

44.	In Puttuswamy12 also the guidelines provided by the Supreme Court in paragraph 260 "The law would be assessed not with reference to its object but on the basis of its effect and impact on the fundamental rights.......The mere fact that the law provides for the deprivation of life or personal liberty is not sufficient to conclude its validity and the procedure to be constitutionally valid must be fair, just and reasonable. The quality of reasonableness does not attach only to the content of the procedure which the law prescribes with reference toArticle 21but to the content of the law itself" and in paragraph 325 are "A law which encroaches upon privacy will have to withstand the touchstone of permissible restrictions on fundamental rights. In the context ofArticle 21an invasion of privacy must be justified on the basis of a law which stipulates a procedure which is fair, just and reasonable. The law must also be valid with reference to the encroachment on life and personal liberty under Article. An invasion of life or personal liberty must meet the threefold requirement of (i) legality, which postulates the existence of law; (ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate State aim; and (iii) proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between the objects and the means adopted to achieve them."

45.	The interpretation ofSections 6and7read withSection 46containing the procedure of publication of notice and inviting objections to the intended marriage in Act of 1954 thus has to be such that would uphold the fundamental rights and not violate the same. In case the same on their simplistic reading are held mandatory, as per the law declared today, they would invade in the fundamental rights of liberty and privacy, including within its sphere freedom to choose for marriage without interference from state and non-state actors, of the persons concerned. Further, note should also be taken of the fact that marriages in India can be performed either under the personal laws or under the Act of 1954. In fact, even today, majority of marriages are performed under the personal laws. These marriages under personal laws are performed by a priest of the religion followed by the parties. Such marriages under any personal law do not require publication of any notice or calling for objections with regard to such a marriage. The individuals intending to marry approach the priest who performs the marriage as per the customs and rituals of the said religion. Their orally saying that they are competent to marry is regarded sufficient for solemnizing marriage under the personal laws. In case any party violates any condition of the said personal law, for example, if one of the parties conceals his/her marital status and commits second marriage; marriage is barred under any law (one of the parties is a minor and conceals age or marriage is within the degrees of the prohibited relationship etc.); the consent of any party is obtained by deceit or under pressure; or any other such circumstances arises, the issues are later decided by a court of law. But, the marriage takes place without any interference from any corner, even if it is later to be declared void. However, underSections 6and7of Act of 1954 the persons intending to solemnize a marriage are required to give a notice and the Marriage Officer thereafter is made duty bound to publish the notice for a period of 30 days and invite objections with regard to the same. Any person can object to the marriage on the ground that it violates any of the condition ofSection 4of Act of 1954. None of the conditions underSection 4of Act of 1954 is such, violation of which would impact rights of any person in any manner different than the same would in case of a marriage under any personal law. Even if a marriage takes place in violation of any of the conditions ofSection 4, legal consequences would follow and the courts can decide upon the same, including declare such a marriage to be void, as they do under the personal laws. There is no apparent reasonable purpose achieved by making the procedure to be more protective or obstructive under the Act of 1954, under which much less numbers of marriages are taking place, than procedure under the other personal laws, more particularly when this discrimination violates the fundamental rights of the class of persons adopting the Act of 1954 for their marriage.

46.	However, in case, such individuals applying to solemnize their marriage under the Act of 1954 themselves by their free choice desire that they would like to have more information about their counterparts, they can definitely opt for publication of notice underSection 6and further procedure with regard to objections to be followed. Such publication of notice and further procedure would not be violative of their fundamental rights as they adopt the same of their free will.  Therefore, the requirement of publication of notice underSection 6and inviting/entertaining objections underSection 7can only be read as directory in nature, to be given effect only on request of parties to the intended marriage and not otherwise.

47.	Thus, this Court mandates that while giving notice underSection 5of the Act of 1954 it shall be optional for the parties to the intended marriage to make a request in writing to the Marriage Officer to publish or not to publish a notice underSection 6and follow the procedure of objections as prescribed under the Act of 1954. In case they do not make such a request for publication of notice in writing, while giving notice underSection 5of the Act, the Marriage Officer shall not publish any such notice or entertain objections to the intended marriage and proceed with the solemnization of the marriage. It goes without saying that it shall be open for the Marriage Officer, while solemnizing any marriage under the Act of 1954, to verify the identification, age and valid consent of the parties or otherwise their competence to marry under the said Act. In case he has any doubt, it shall be open for him to ask for appropriate details/proof as per the facts of the case.

48.	Since the matter relates to protection of fundamental rights of large number of persons, the Senior Registrar of this Court shall ensure that a copy of this order is communicated to the Chief Secretary of the State of U.P. who shall forthwith communicate the same to all the Marriage Officers of the State and other concerned authorities as expeditiously as possible.

49.	With the aforesaid, the present writ petition stands disposed of.

Order Date:- 12.01.2021
 
Shubhankar
 
(Vivek Chaudhary, J.)